# A Max-SMT Superoptimizer for EVM handling Memory and Storage
DOI: 10.1007/978-3-030-99524-9_11
Source: https://link.springer.com/content/pdf/10.1007/978-3-030-99524-9_11.pdf (pdf)

======================================================================

A Max-SMT Superoptimizer for EVM handling
Memory and Storage ?
Elvira Albert 1;2
 , Pablo Gordillo 2()
 ,
Alejandro Hern andez-Cerezo2
 , and Albert Rubio 1;2
1 Instituto de Tecnolog a del Conocimiento, Madrid, Spain
2 Complutense University of Madrid, Madrid, Spain
pabgordi@ucm.es
Abstract. Superoptimization is a compilation technique that searches
for the optimal sequence of instructions semantically equivalent to a given
(loop-free) initial sequence. With the advent of SMT solvers, it has been
successfully applied to LLVM code (to reduce the number of instructions)
and to Ethereum EVM bytecode (to reduce its gas consumption). Both
applications, when proven practical, have left out memory operations and
thus missed important optimization opportunities. A main challenge to
superoptimization today is handling memory operations while remaining
scalable. We present GASOLv2, a gas and bytes-size superoptimization
tool for Ethereum smart contracts, that leverages a previous Max-SMT
approach for only stack optimization to optimize also wrt. memory and
storage. GASOLv2 can be used to optimize the size in bytes, aligned with
the optimization criterion used by the Solidity compiler solc, and it can
also be used to optimize gas consumption. Our experiments on 12,378
blocks from 30 randomly selected real contracts achieve gains of 16.42% in
gas wrt. the previous version of the optimizer without memory handling,
and gains of 3.28% in bytes-size over code already optimized by solc.
1 Introduction and Related Work
Superoptimization is an automated technique for code optimization that was
proposed back in 1987 [ 20]. It aims at automatically nding the optimal (wrt.
the considered optimization criteria) instruction sequence |which is semanti-
cally equivalent| to a given sequence of loop-free instructions. It diers from
traditional optimization techniques in that it uses search rather than applying
pre-cooked transformations. However, as it requires exhaustive search in the
space of valid instruction sequences, it suers from high computation demands
and it was considered impractical for many years. The rst attempts of applying
superoptimization were within a GNU C compiler back in the nineties [ 15] and,
later, it has also been applied for an x86-64 assembly language [ 10,11].
There is a recent revival of superoptimization due to the availability of
SMT solvers which oer powerful techniques to handle enumerative search and
? This research was funded by the Spanish MCIN/AEI/10.13039/ 501100011033/-
FEDER \Una manera de hacer Europa" projects RTI2018-094403-B-C31 and
RTI2018-094403-B-C33, by the CM project S2018/TCS-4314 co-funded by EIE
Funds of the European Union, and by the Ethereum Foundation grant FY21-0372.
c The Author(s) 2022
D. Fisman and G. Rosu (Eds.): TACAS 2022, LNCS 13243, pp. 201–219, 2022.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-99524-9_11


E. Albert et al.
to check semantic equivalence. The approaches to supercompilation based on
SMT can be roughly classied into two types: (1) Those that use an external
synthesis algorithm with pruning techniques, such as [ 9,12,17], and that invoke
the SMT solver to solve certain queries. This is the approach of the Souper
superoptimizer [22] that relies on the synthesis algorithm for loop-free programs
of Gulwani et al. [ 17]; (2) Those that directly produce an SMT encoding of the
problem and use the search engine of the solver. This is the approach of [ 18],
EBSO [21] and SYRUP [ 7]. Both types of approaches have been proven to be
practical on their own settings and optimization criteria: the analysis of blocks
does not reach the timeout of 10 sec in 90% of the cases [ 7] in SYRUP, and
Souper optimized three million lines of C++ in 88 minutes [22]. The optimizations
achieved vary for the considered criteria, Souper reported around 4.4% reduction
in number of instructions, and SYRUP reported 0.58% in the global Ethereum
gas usage. Scalability has been partly achieved because challenging features
have been left out of the encoding: memory operations have been excluded both
in Souper and SYRUP . While EBSO included a basic encoding for memory
operations, its practicality was not proven: EBSO times out in 82% of the blocks
and achieves optimization in less than 1% of all analyzed blocks. Leaving out
memory operations dismisses optimization opportunities of two kinds: (a) as it
works on smaller blocks of instructions (since the optimizer stops when nding
a memory operation), the stack optimization is more limited, and (b) besides
it misses possible optimizations on the memory operations themselves (e.g.,
eliminating unnecessary accesses).
The Ethereum Virtual Machine (EVM) has two areas where it can store items
(besides the stack): (1) the storage is where all contract state variables reside, every
contract has its own storage and it is persistent between external function calls
(transactions) and has a higher gas cost to use; (2) the memory is used to hold
temporary values, and it is erased between transactions and thus is cheaper to use.
For conciseness, we often use \memory" to include both storage and memory, as
their treatment for optimization is identical except for their associated costs. Our
big challenge is to be able to handle memory operations while remaining practical,
i.e., not reaching the timeout in the optimization of the vast majority of the
blocks. This is achieved by leveraging SYRUP's two-staged method [ 7] to handle
memory: (i) the rst stage is devoted to synthesize a stack specication from the
bytecode and apply simplication rules to it, and (ii) in a second stage a Max-
SMT solver is used to perform the search for the optimal solution. When lifting
such two-staged method to handle memory operations, we make two important
extensions: in stage (i), we now synthesize a stack and memory specication
from the bytecode on which we detect dependencies among memory operations
and possibly remove redundant operations; (ii) this dependency information is
included in our second stage as part of the encoding so that the SMT solver
only needs to consider the dependence among such memory instructions when
performing the search. Our two-staged approach allows isolating the dependency
analysis process from the search itself, reducing the eort the SMT solver does
in order to nd the optimal sequence. The approach of Bansal and Aiken [ 10]
202

A Max-SMT Superoptimizer for EVM handling Memory and Storage
to handle memory operations diers from ours on the superoptimization scope
and the search process itself. Their tool considers multiple target sequences from
a training set simultaneously and generates a database of (possibly) millions of
optimizations. They enumerate all well-formed instructions sequences up to a
certain size, including memory operations, and test the equivalence among them
via a hash function. Our tool considers each sequence of instructions to optimize
independently and the search is done via the search engine of an SMT solver.
GASOLv2 can be considered a successor of SYRUP [ 7], as it adopts its two-
staged process and reuses part of its components, but it incorporates three
fundamental extensions, and a new experimental evaluation, that constitute
the main contributions of this paper: (1) GASOLv2 starts from the assembly
json [1] generated by the solc compiler, rather than being used as a standalone
optimization tool as SYRUP. This is fundamental to achieve a wide use of the tool
since it is already linked to one of the most used compilers for coding Ethereum
smart contracts. (2) It optimizes memory and storage operations using on one
hand rule simplications at the level of a specication synthesized from the
bytecode, and on the other hand, a new SMT encoding which enables achieving
a great balance between the accuracy and the overhead of the process. (3) While
SYRUP is a tool that only optimizes the gas consumption of the bytecode, we
have generalized some of its components to enable other optimization criteria.
Currently we have included as well size in bytes, but other criteria can be
easily incorporated now to the superoptimizer. (4) Besides we have performed a
thorough experimental evaluation of our tool and have compared the results wrt.
those obtained by SYRUP. The main conclusion of our evaluation is that handling
memory operations in superoptimization pays o: it can achieve gains of 16.42%
in gas over SYRUP, and reductions of 0.1% in gas and 3.28% in size (on already
optimized code). If we assume that these savings are uniformly distributed, and
the gas data obtained from Etherscan is constant, the 0.1% gas saved wrt the
SYRUP [7] would amount nearly to 9.5 Million dollars in 2021.
GASOLv2 is part of the GASOL project [ 3], a GAS Optimization tooLkit for
Ethereum smart contracts. The initial GASOL tool (i.e., GASOLv1), presented
in [5], aimed at detecting gas-expensive patterns within program loops (using
resource analysis) and made a program transformation (which does not rely on
SMT solvers) at the source code level. Hence, it contains a global (inter-block)
optimization technique that is orthogonal to our superoptimizer, in which we
perform local (or intra-block) transformations on loop-free code, and besides we
work at bytecode rather than at source level. Both complementary techniques
will be integrated within the GASOL toolkit, hence their names. In what follows,
we drop v2 and use GASOL to refer to the tool presented in this paper.
2 The Architecture of GASOL
Figure1 displays the architecture of GASOL, white components are borrowed
from other tools, while gray components correspond to the new developments of
this paper (either completely new, like DEP, or novel extensions for memory
handling of previous SYRUP's implementations, like SPEC, SIMP and SMS).
203

BLK
Input
Output
Optimized 
EVM 
Bytecode
Solidity / EVM 
Bytecode Assembly
 JSON code
 
BLK Blocks
 
BLKSPEC
SMS
SOLC
BLKBLKSIMP
BLK
DEPPre-Order Simplified
SMS
BLK
Max
SMT
System 
Settings
Optimization 
Report
Phase 2
Phase 1
Conflicts
Fig. 1: Architecture of GASOLv2
The input to GASOL is a smart contract (either its source in Solidity or its
compiled EVM bytecode [ 23]), a selection of the optimization criteria (currently
we are supporting gas consumption and size in bytes), and system settings (this
includes compiler options for invoking the solc compiler and GASOL settings like
the timeout per block of instructions). The output of GASOL is an optimized
bytecode program and optionally a report with detailed information on the
optimizations achieved (e.g., number of blocks optimized, number of blocks
proven optimal, gas/size reduction gains, optimization time, among others).
The rst component, labeled SOLC in the gure, invokes the Solidity compiler
solc to obtain the bytecode in their assembly json exchange format [1]. Working on
this exchange format has many advantages, one is that we can enable the optimizer
of solc [4] and start the superoptimization from an already optimized bytecode.
Besides, the format has been designed to be a usable common denominator
for EVM 1.0, EVM 1.5 and Ewasm. Hence, we argue it is a good source for
superoptimization as dierent target platforms will be able to use our tool
equally. The assembly json format provides the EVM bytecode of the smart
contract, metadata that relates it with the source Solidity code, and compilation
information such as the version used to generate the bytecode. The output yield
by GASOL can also be returned in assembly json format so that it can be used
by other tools working on this format in the future. From the assembly json,
the next component BLK partitions the bytecode given by solc into a set of
sequences of loop-free bytecode instructions, named blocks, which correspond to
the blocks of the CFG and also computes the size of the stack when entering each
block.3 We omit details of this step as it is standard in compiler construction
and, for the case of the EVM, has been already subject of other analysis and
optimization papers (see, e.g. [ 8,14,16] and their references).
The next component SPEC synthesizes a functional specication of the
operand stack and of the memory and storage (SMS for short) for each block of
bytecode instructions. This is done by symbolically executing the bytecodes in
the block to extract from them what the contents of the operand stack and of
the memory/storage are after executing them. The description of this component
is given in Sec. 3.1 . Next, DEP establishes the dependencies among the memory
accesses from which a pre-order, that determines when a memory access needs
3 In EVM, it is possible to reach a block with dierent stack sizes, and all such sizes
can be statically computed. We will refer to the minimum or maximum when needed.
E. Albert et al.204

(1) (MLOAD;< S; M; St> ) := < [MLOAD(S[0])] + S[1 :n]; M + [MLOAD(S[0])]; St>
(2)(MSTORE;< S; M; St> ) := < S[2 :n]; M + [MSTORE(S[0]; S[1])]; St>
(3) (SLOAD;< S; M; St> ) := < [SLOAD(S[0])] + S[1 :n]; M; St + [SLOAD(S[0])]>
(4)(SSTORE;< S; M; St> ) := < S[2 :n]; M; St + [SSTORE(S[0]; S[1])]>
(5) (SWAPX;< S; M; St> ) := let temp = S[0] < S[0=X][X=temp]; M; St>
(6) (POP;< S; M; St> ) := < S[1 :n]; M; St>
Fig. 2: SMS Synthesis by Symbolic execution
to be performed before another one, is generated. For instance, subsequent load
accesses, which are not interleaved by any store, do not have dependencies among
them, while they do have with subsequent write accesses to the same positions.
This phase is described in Secs. 3.2 (dependencies) and 3.3 (pre-order). In the
next component SIMP, we apply simplication rules on the SMS. We include
all stack simplication rules of SYRUP [ 7], as well as the additional rules we
have developed for memory/storage simplications. For instance, successive write
accesses that overwrite the same memory position are simplied to a single one
provided the same memory location is not read by any other instruction between
them. The description of this component is given in Sec. 3.2 . Finally, we generate
a Max-SMT encoding from the (simplied) SMS that incorporates the pre-order
established by the component DEP and from which the optimized bytecode is
obtained. The description of this component is given in Sec. 4 .
3 Synthesis of Stack and Memory Specications
This section describes the rst stage of the optimization (components SPEC,
SIMP and DEP) that consists in synthesizing from a loop-free sequence of byte-
code instructions a simplied specication of the stack and of the memory/storage
(with the dependencies) that the execution of such bytecodes produces.
3.1 Initial Stack and Memory/Storage Specication
For each block, we synthesize its Stack and Memory Specication (SMS) by
symbolically executing the instructions in the sequence. Function  in Fig.2
denes the symbolic execution for the memory/storage operations (1-4) and
includes two representative stack opcodes (5-6). The rst parameter of  is a
bytecode instruction and the second one is the SMS data structure <S,M,St>
whose rst element corresponds to the stack (S), the second one to the memory
(M), and the third one to the storage (St). The stackS is a list whose position
S[0] corresponds to the top of the stack. At the beginning of executing a block,
the stack contains the minimum number of elements needed to execute the block
represented by symbolic variables si, where si models the element atS[i]. The
resulting listM (St resp.) will contain the sequence of memory (storage resp.)
accesses executed by the block. By abuse of notation, we often treat lists as
sequences. BothM andSt are empty before executing the block symbolically.
As an example, the symbolic execution of SSTORE removes the two top-most
elements from S, and adds the symbolic expression SSTORE(S[0];S[1]) to the
storage sequence. Similarly, SLOAD removes from the top of the stack the position
to be read, puts on the top of the stack the symbolic expression SLOAD(S[0]) that
A Max-SMT Superoptimizer for EVM handling Memory and Storage 205

represents the value read from the storage position S[0], and adds the same
expression to the storage sequence St. As a result of applying  to a sequence of
bytecodes, the SMS obtained provides a specication of the target stack after
executing the sequence in terms of the elements located in the stack before
executing the sequence and, the target memory/storage (given as a sequence of
accesses) after executing the sequence in terms of the input stack elements too.
Example 1. Consider the following bytecode that belongs to a real contract
(bytecodes 0 to 47 of Welfare [2]). Its assembly json yield by theSOLC component
contains 4524 bytecodes and after being partitioned by BLK we have 437 blocks
to optimize. We illustrate the superoptimization of this block that contains in
total 48 bytecodes from which 5 are the (underlined) memory/storage accesses:
1 PUSH1 80
2 PUSH1 40
3 MSTORE
4 PUSH1 64
5 PUSH1 1
6 PUSH1 14
7 PUSH2 100
8 EXP
9 DUP2
10 SLOAD
11 DUP2
12 PUSH2 FFFF
13 MUL
14 NOT
15 AND
16 SW AP1
17 DUP4
18 PUSH2 FFFF
19 AND
20 MUL
21 OR
22 SW AP1
23 SSTORE
24 POP
25 PUSH2 3E8
26 PUSH1 1
27 PUSH1 16
28 PUSH2 100
29 EXP
30 DUP2
31 SLOAD
32 DUP2
33 PUSH2 FFFF
34 MUL
35 NOT
36 AND
37 SW AP1
38 DUP4
39 PUSH2 FFFF
40 AND
41 MUL
42 OR
43 SW AP1
44 SSTORE
45 POP
46 CALL V ALUE
47 DUP1
48 ISZERO
As BLK returns that the stack is empty when entering the block, we apply  to
the initial state < [ ]; [ ]; [ ]> and produce the following SMS at the next selected
lines: L1: (PUSH1 80;< [ ]; [ ]; [ ] >) =< [128]; [ ]; [ ] >
L2: (PUSH1 40;< [128]; [ ]; [ ] >) =< [64; 128]; [ ]; [ ] >
L3: (MSTORE;< [64; 128]; [ ]; [ ] >) =< [ ]; [MSTORE(64,128)]; [ ] >
Finally, we get that at L48 S = [ISZERO(CALLVALUE); CALLVALUE], M = [MSTORE(64,128)],
St = [ SLOAD1(1); SSTORE(1,V1); SLOAD2(1); SSTORE(1,V2)] where V1 = OR(MUL(...)),
AND(NOT(..)); SLOAD1(1)) (omitting subexpressions) and V2 is another similar expression
involving arithmetic, binary operations and SLOAD2(1). Note that we use subscripts
to distinguish the SLOAD instructions by their position in St. The stack specication
contains a term that represents the result of the opcode CALLVALUE (executed at line46 ,
L46for short), and a term with the result of executing the opcode ISZERO on CALLVALUE,
stored on top of the stack. The memory only contains one element that is obtained by
symbolically executing the three rst instructions. The PUSH instructions at L1and L 2
introduce the values 64 and 128 on the stack, and the MSTORE executed at L3introduces
in M the symbolic expression MSTORE(40,80). Similarly, St contains the sequence of
symbolic expressions that represent the storage instructions executed in the block at
L10, L23, L31and L 44respectively. The expressions corresponding to V1 and V2 are also
obtained by applying function  to the corresponding state. These stack expressions
can be simplied in the next step using the rules in [ 7].
We note that the EVM memory is byte addressable (e.g., with instructionMSTORE8)
and two dierent memory accesses may overlap. For simplicity of the presentation,
we only consider the general case of word-addressable accesses, but the technique
extends easily to the byte addressable case. In what follows, we use LOAD to
abstract from the specic memory ( MLOAD) and storage ( SLOAD) bytecodes (and
the same for STORE), when they are treated in the same way.
3.2 Memory/Storage Simplications
In order to dene the simplications, and to later indicate to the SMT solver
which memory instructions need to follow an order, we compute the conicts
between the dierent load and store instructions within each sequence.
E. Albert et al.206

Denition 1. Two memory accesses A and B conict, denoted as conf(A,B) if:
(i) A is a store and B is a load and the positions they access might be the same;
(ii) A and B are both stores, the positions they modify might be the same, and
they store dierent values.
Note that in (ii) two store instructions that might operate on the same position
do not conict if the values they store are equal, as we will reach the same
memory state regardless of the order in which the stores are executed. Note that
two load instructions are never in conict as the memory state does not change
if we execute them in one order or another.
Given the SMS obtained in Sec. 3.1 , we achieve simplications by applying
the stack simplication rules of [ 7] and, besides, the following new memory
simplication rules based on Def. 1 to the M and S components (that achieve
optimizations of type (b) according to the classication mentioned in Sec. 1 ):
Denition 2(memory simplications). Let <S;M;St >be an SMS, we
can apply the following simplications to any subsequence b1;:::;b n inM orSt:
i) ifb1 =STORE(p;v ) andbn =LOAD(p) and @bi =STORE withi∈{ 2;:::;n −1} and
conf(b1,bi), we simplify it to b1;:::;b n−1 and replace bn by v in the resulting
SMS.
ii) if b1 =STORE(p;v ) and bn =STORE(p;w ) and @bi =LOAD with i∈{ 2;:::;n − 1}
conf(b1,bi), we simplify it to b2;:::;b n.
iii) if b1 =LOAD(p) and bn =STORE(p;LOAD(p)) and @bi =STORE with i∈{ 2;:::;n −
1} conf(b1,bi), we simplify it to b1;:::;b n−1.
The simplications can be applied in any order within M andSt until the process
converges and the resulting sequence cannot be further simplied.
Intuitively, in (i), a load instruction from a position after a store instruction to
the same position is simplied in the stack to the stored value provided there
is no other store operation in between that might have changed the content
of this position. In (ii), two subsequent store instructions to the same position
are simplied to a single store if there is no load access on the same position
between them. In (iii), a store instruction that stores in a position the result of
the load in the same position can be removed, provided there is no other store in
between that might have changed the content of this position. Note that such
simplication rules can be applied to general-purpose compilers.
Example 2. In the SMS of Ex.1 , we have that conf(SLOAD1(1),SSTORE(1,V1)), conf
(SLOAD1(1),SSTORE(1,V2)), conf(SLOAD2(1),SSTORE(1,V1)), conf(SLOAD2(1),SSTORE(1,
V2)) and conf(SSTORE(1,V1,SSTORE(1,V2)) as all accesses operate on the same lo-
cation. With these conicts, we can apply rule i) to SLOAD2(1), as the previous
SSTORE instruction has stored the value V1 at the same location and there are no
other storage instructions with conict between them. Hence, we eliminate it
fromSt and replace it by V1 in the resulting SMS. After that, we are able to apply
rule ii) on the two SSTORE instructions as they store a value at the same position
without conict loads in between. Then, we remove SSTORE(1,V1) fromSt. The
resulting SMS has the same S andM andSt is now [SLOAD1(1); SSTORE(1,V2')]
where V2' is V2 replacing SLOAD2(1) by V1.
A Max-SMT Superoptimizer for EVM handling Memory and Storage 207

3.3 Pre-Order for Memory and Uninterpreted Functions
Given the SMS and using the conict denition above, we generate a pre-order,
as dened below, that indicates to the SMT solver the order between the memory
accesses that needs to be kept in order to obtain the same memory state as the
original one. Clearly, having more accurate conict tests will result in weaker
pre-orders and hence a wider search space for the SMT solver. This in turn will
result in potentially larger optimization. Our implementation is highly parametric
on the conict test DEP so that more accurate tests can be easily incorporated.
Denition 3. LetA and B be two memory accesses in a sequence S. We say
that B has to be executed after A in S, denoted as A @B if:
i) (store-store)B is a store instruction and A is the closest store instruction
predecessor ofB in S such that conf(A,B).
ii) (load-store)A is a load instruction and B is the closest store instruction
successor of A in S such that conf(B,A).
iii) (store-load)B is a load instruction and A is the closest store instruction
predecessor ofB in S such that conf(A,B).
Let us observe that we do not compute the closure for the dependencies at this
stage, as the SMT solver will infer them, as explained in Sec. 4.2 .
Example 3. From the simplied SMS of Ex. 2 , we get the following load-store
dependency, SLOAD1(1) @ SSTORE(1,V2'), while the access MSTORE(64,128) has no
dependencies as it is the unique memory operation.
Importantly, the notion of pre-order between memory instructions can also be
naturally extended to all other operations that occur in the specication of the
target stack. These operations are handled as uninterpreted functions and have to
be called in the right order to build the result that is required in the target stack.
Therefore, we propose a novel implementation (both in SYRUP and GASOL) that
extends the pre-order @ to uninterpreted functions by adding A @B also when:
iv) (uninterpreted-functions)A and B are uninterpreted functions that occur in
the target stack as B(:::;A (::: );::: ).
While in the case of uninterpreted functions the pre-order is used for improving
performance, for memory operations the use of the pre-order is mandatory for
soundness, since it is what ensures that the obtained block after optimization has
the same nal state (in the stack, memory and storage) than the original block.
3.4 Bounding the Operations Position
As we will show in the next section, a solution to our SMT encoding assigns a
position in the nal instruction list to each operation such that the target stack
is obtained. A key element for the performance of the encoding we propose in
this paper is based on extracting from the instruction pre-order @, upper and
lower bounds to the position the operations can take in the instruction list. The
lower bound for a given function is obtained by inspecting the subterm where it
occurs in the target stack and analyzing its operands to detect the earliest point
E. Albert et al.208

in which the result of all them can be placed in the stack, taking into account
that shared subcomputations can be obtained using a DUP opcode. On the other
hand, the upper bound for a function is obtained by inspecting the position in
the target stack they occur and analyzing the operations that use the term that
is headed by this function, to obtain the latest point in which this term could be
computed. From this analysis, we obtain both the upper UB () and lower LB()
bounds for every uninterpreted (which includes the load) and store operation ,
which are extensively used in the encoding provided in the next section.
4 Max-SMT Superoptimization
This section describes the second stage of the optimization process (named Max
SMT in Fig.1 ) that consists in producing, from the SMS and the dependencies,
a Max-SMT encoding such that any valid model corresponds to a bytecode
equivalent to the initial one and optimized for the selected criterion.
4.1 Stack Representation in the SMT Encoding
The stack representation is the same as in [ 7]: the stack can hold non-negative
integer constants in the range{0;:::; 2256−1}, matching the 256-bit words in the
EVM; initial stack variabless0;:::;s k−1, represent the initial (unknown) elements
of the stack; and fresh variables sk;:::;s v abstract each dierent subterm (built
from opcodes and the initial stack variables) that appears in the SMS. A stack
variable of the form si is represented in the encoding as the integer constant
2256 +i, so that all stack elements in the model are integer values. To represent
the contents of the stack after applying a sequence of instructions, a bound on
the number of operations bo and the size of the stack bs must be given. These
numbers are statically computed by considering the size of the initial block and
the maximum number of stack elements involved. Then, propositional variables
ui;j, withi∈{ 0;:::;b s−1} andj∈{ 0;:::;b o}, are used to denote whether there
exists an element at position i in the stack after executing the rst j operations,
where the element u0;j refers to the topmost element of the stack. Quantied
variablesxi;j∈ Z are introduced to identify the word at position i after applying
j operations, following the same format as ui;j.
An instruction ∈I in the encoding can be either a basic stack opcode
(POP, SWAPk, ::: ), a distinct expression that appears in the SMS or the extra
instruction NOP that represents the possibility no opcode has been applied. A
mapping  is introduced to link every instruction in I to a non-negative integer
in{0;:::;m }, where m + 1 =|I|. This way, we can introduce the existentially
quantied variablestj, with tj∈{ 0;:::;m } and j∈{ 0;:::;b o− 1}, to denote
that the instruction  is applied at step j when tj =(). There is a special case
to be considered when identifying the instructions from an SMS: each expression
containing a single occurrence of an opcode in Wbase (see [23]) is considered as an
independent expression with a dierent . Opcodes in Wbase consume no operand
from top of the stack and have lower gas cost and equal byte count as DUPk, so we
can safely assume that in an optimal block such expressions are never duplicated.
For eciency reasons, we also apply the reciprocal: any other expression is forced
to appear exactly once in our solution, as our experiments show that duplicating
A Max-SMT Superoptimizer for EVM handling Memory and Storage 209

the expression is always better than computing it more than once. However, note
that this may not hold, in general, when the cost of the expression is low or the
size of the operating stack is high, and hence, although is highly unlikely, we may
lose some better solutions. From this assumption, we have that every  we have
introduced must appear exactly once in every model, which simplies greatly
both the pre-order encoding and the gas model used. The following example
illustrates how the SMS is processed and the relevance of considering Wbase:
Example 4. Consider a modied version of Ex.1 , in whichS = [ISZERO(CALLVALUE);
CALLVALUE] butM;St are both empty. b0;bs are bounded to 3 and 2 resp., as
three instructions are enough to compute the given SMS and it reaches a stack
size of two elements. Each application of CALLVALUE is considered independently,
as CALLVALUE∈ Wbase . Variables s0 := 2 256;s 1 := 2 256 + 1;s 2 := 2 256 + 2 are
introduced to represent the stack variable obtained from CALLVALUE0; CALLVALUE1
and ISZERO(CALLVALUE1). GASOL creates the following  map:
 :={PUSH : 0; POP : 1; NOP : 2; DUP1 : 3; SWAP1 : 4;
CALLVALUE0 : 5; CALLVALUE1 : 6; ISZERO(CALLVALUE1) : 7}
The optimal sequence is CALLVALUECALLVALUE ISZERO , which consumes 7 units of
gas. It improves the cost of L 46-L48, which consumes 8 due to the use of DUP1.
The set of instructions I can be split in four subsets IS⊎IU⊎IC⊎ISt:
{ IS contains the basic stack operations: PUSH, POP, NOP, DUPk, and SWAPk, with
k∈{ 1;:::;min (bs− 1; 16)}. DUPk and SWAPk are restricted by bs because
they cannot deal with elements that go beyond the maximum stack size.
{ IU contains the non-commutative uninterpreted functions that appear in the
SMS. Its subsetIL⊆I U denotes the set of load instructions.
{ IC contains the commutative uninterpreted functions in the SMS.
{ ISt contains the write operations in memory structures.
The encoding for subsets IS⊎IU⊎IC was already considered in [ 7], whereas
ISt was left out. Instead, blocks were split when an opcode belonging to ISt was
found. The inclusion of ISt instructions in the model leads to more savings in
gas, as more optimizations can be applied in larger blocks (those correspond to
optimizations of type (a) in the classication given in Sec. 1 ).
For each∈I and each possible position j in the sequence of instructions, we
add a constraint to represent the impact of this combination on the stack. These
constraints match the semantics of  when projecting onto the stack component,
so that we encode the elements of the stack after executing  in terms of the
ones before its execution. They follow the structure tj = ()⇒ C(j), where
C(j) expresses the changes in the stack after applying . The constraints for
IS⊎IU⊎IC are detailed in [ 7], our extension in this section is only to include
the constraints to reect the impact of storage operations on the stack. For this
purpose, we use an auxiliary predicate Move (already used in [ 7]) to denote that
all elements in the stack are moved two positions to the right in the resulting
stack state. Thus, we have the following constraint for each position j and each
E. Albert et al.210

∈I St, where o0 and o1 denote the position and value stored:
CSt(j; ) := tj =()⇒u0;j ∧ u1;j ∧ x0;j =o0 ∧ x1;j =o1∧
Move(j; 2;bs− 1;−2) ∧ ¬ubs−1;j+1 ∧ ¬ubs−2;j+1
Finally, we express the contents of the stack before executing the instructions
of the block (initial stack) and after having executed them (target stack) by
assigning the corresponding values (whether constants or stack variables) to
ui;0;xi;0 and to ui;bo;xi;bo respectively. The overall SMT encoding for the stack
representation is denoted as CSFS and it is encoded using QF LIA logic.
Example 5. Following Ex.4 , GASOL generates the constraint shown below to
update the contents of the stack after applying  = ISZERO(CALLVALUE1) at step 2:
C(2; ) := t2 = 7⇒u0;2 ∧ x0;2 = 2256 + 1∧
u0;3 ∧ x0;3 = 2256 + 2∧ u1;3 =u1;2 ∧ x1;3 =x1;2
4.2 Encoding the Pre-order Relation
Once the stack representation has been formalized, we also need to consider the
conicts that appear among memory operations as part of our encoding, as well as
the dependencies between uninterpreted functions. All this is made by encoding
the pre-order relation given in Sec. 3.3 . We consider each pair of instructions ;′
s.t.  @′. We aim to prevent conicting operations from appearing in the wrong
order in a model, by imposing that  cannot occur in the assignment after ′.
Our proposed approach consists in introducing a variable l() for every
instruction ∈I C∪I U∪I St :=Ilord to track the position it appears in a
sequence. This information is useful for specifying multiple conditions in the
encoding that are dicult to reect otherwise. Firstly, these variables implicitly
enforce that  must be tied to exactly one position, and thus, included in every
sequence exactly once. Besides, we can narrow the positions in which can appear
by using LB();UB () bounds. Finally, as QF LIA supports ordering among
variables, the order between conicting instructions can be encoded as a plain
comparison between their positions. Hence, the following constraints are derived:
LP () :=LB()≤l()≤UB () ∧
^
LB()≤j≤ UB ()
(l() =j)⇔ (tj =())
Llord(;′) :=l() <l (0) where  @′
Regarding memory operations, there is no need to consider special cases. The
whole encoding can be expressed as follows:
CSMS := CSFS ∧
^
∈Ilord
LP () ∧
^
@0
Llord(;′)
4.3 Optimization using Max-SMT
As in [ 7], we formulate the problem of nding an optimal block as a partial
weighted Max-SMT problem. In this section we show that the same encoding
for gas optimization can be used in the presence of memory operations and
that other optimization criterion, like bytes-size, can be included as well in
our framework. Basically, in our Max-SMT problem, the hard constraints that
A Max-SMT Superoptimizer for EVM handling Memory and Storage 211

must be satised by every model are those constraints for computing the SMS;
and the soft constraints are used to nd the optimal solution: a set of pairs
{[C1;! 1];:::; [Cn;!n]}, where Ci denotes an SMT clause and !i its weight. The
Max-SMT solver minimizes the weights of the falsied soft constraints. The
weights of soft constraints presented in [7] match the gas spent for the sequence of
instructions, thus ensuring an optimal model corresponds to a block that spends
the least possible amount of gas. This gas encoding is also included in GASOL,
but instructions inIlord are removed from the soft constraints. Hard constraints
already assert the exact number of times these instructions must appear in a
sequence and therefore, they only add unnecessary extra cost that may harm the
search of an optimality proof.
However, gas consumption is not the only relevant objective to consider when
optimizing the code. When a contract is deployed, a fee of 200 units of gas must
be paid for each non-zero byte of the EVM binary code. The desired trade-o
between the initial deployment cost and invoking transactions can be specied in
solc by setting the expected number of contract runs. In some cases, this leads to
solc intentionally not fully replacing expressions that have a constant result by
the value they represent if this constant is a large number, since the needed PUSH
instructions will need many more non-zero bytes and hence will increment the
deployment gas cost. For instance, if we want to have 2 256− 1 on the top of the
stack we can either push a zero and perform the bitwise NOT operation, which
has gas cost 6 and non-zero bytes length 2 or push 2 256− 1 directly which has
gas cost 3 but non-zero bytes length 33.
When the bytes-size criterion is selected, we disable the application of the
simplication rules of [ 7] that increase the byte-size and, besides, propose the
next approach based on the bytes-size model for the Max-SMT encoding. This
model is fairly simple except for the handling of the PUSH related instructions,
denoted asIP in what follows. All instructions that are not in IP use exactly
one byte. Instead PUSHx instructions take one byte to specify the opcode itself,
and x bytes to include the pushed value. A rst attempt to encode the weight
of the PUSHx we tried was based on precisely describing the size in bytes based
on the corresponding 32 options that x can take in terms of number of bytes.
(recall that in EVM we have 256-bit words). This encoding is precise, but did
not work in practice. An alternative, much simpler encoding, is based on the
observation that numerical values can only appear in a model because at least
once the corresponding PUSHx instruction is made. Later on, this value can be
repeated using DUP, which has a minimal cost wrt. size of bytes, but if the
block is large, some SWAP operation may also be needed. To make the encoding
perform well in practice, we need to associate a single constant weight to allPUSHx
operations, that is high enough to avoid models where expensive PUSHx operations
are performed more than once instead of duplicating them. Our experiments have
shown that a weight of 5 is enough to obtain optimal results for the sizes of blocks
that the Max-SMT is able to handle. Then, we can assume NOP instructions cost
0 units, instructions inIp costs 5 units and the remaining instructions cost 1 unit.
Hence, three disjoint sets are introduced to match previous costs: W0 :={NOP},
E. Albert et al.212

W5 :=Ip and W1 :=IS\ (W0⊎W5). 
′ bytes-size model is followed directly:

′
SMS :=
[
06j<bo
{[tj =(NOP); 1]; [
_
∈W0⊎W1
tj =(); 4]}
Example 6. The optimized bytecode returned by GASOL for the gas criterion
is PUSH24* PUSH 80 PUSH 40 MSTORE PUSH 1 SLOAD PUSH32* AND PUSH21* OR PUSH32* AND OR PUSH 1 SSTORE
CALLVALUE CALLVALUE ISZERO (using * to skip large constants), which achieves a reduction
of 5905 units wrt. the original version and is proven optimal. For the bytes-size
criterion, GASOL times out due to the larger size of the block when size-increasing
simplication rules are disabled. This issue will be discussed in Sec. 5 .
5 Implementation and Experiments
This section provides further implementation details and describes our experimen-
tal evaluation. The GASOL tool is implemented in Python and uses as Max-SMT
solver OptiMathSAT (OMS) [13] version 1.6.3 (which is the optimality framework
of MathSAT). The aim of the experiments is to assess the eectiveness of our
proposal by comparing it with the previous tool SYRUP. A timeout is given to the
tools to specify the maximum amount of time that they can use for the analysis of
each block. The timeout given to GASOL must be larger than for SYRUP because
it works on less and larger blocks in order to analyze the same contract. We
have used as timeout for SYRUP 10 sec, and for GASOL, we use 10*(#store+1)
sec, as this would correspond to the addition of the times in SYRUP given to
the partitioned blocks. It should be noted though that the cost of the search to
be performed grows exponentially with the number of additional instructions.
Therefore, in spite of giving a similar timeout, GASOL might time out in cases
in which it has to deal with rather large blocks, while SYRUP does not on the
corresponding smaller partitioned blocks. For this reason, we have implemented
two additional versions: gasolall splits the blocks at all stores as SYRUP, and
gasol24 splits at store instructions only those blocks that have a size larger than
24 instructions. This is because we have observed during experimentation that
the SMT search does not terminate in a reasonable time from that size on. The
24-partitioning starts from the end of the block and splits it if it nds a store. If
the partitioned sub-block (from the start) still has a size larger than 24, further
partitioning is done again if a new store is found from its end, and so on. Still,
depending on where the stores are, the resulting blocks can have sizes larger than
24, as it happens in SYRUP as well. Further experimentation will be needed
to come up with intelligent heuristics for the partitioning. The gasol versions
implement all techniques described in the paper, including the SMT encoding
dependencies between uninterpreted functions as described in Sec. 3.3 . We have
the following versions of GASOL and SYRUP in the evaluation: (1) syrupcav is
the original tool from [ 7], (2) gasolall splits the blocks at all stores as in syrupcav,
(3) gasol24 performs the 24-partitioning described above, (4) gasolnone does not
perform any additional partitioning of blocks, and (5) gasolbest uses gasolall,
gasol24, and gasolnone, as a portfolio of possible optimization results (running
them in parallel) and keeps the best result.
We run the tools using the gas usage and the bytes-size criteria in Sec. 4.3 .
As already mentioned, SYRUP in [ 7] did not include the bytes-size criterion,
A Max-SMT Superoptimizer for EVM handling Memory and Storage 213

Gnormal Gtimeout %Gtotal Tgas Bnormal Btimeout %Btotal Tbytes
syrupcav 35689 11129 0.62% 142,93 { { { {
gasolall 36344 11975 0.64% 120,21 3712 2213 2.64% 200,17
gasol24 38765 12336 0.68% 327,36 4315 2238 2.92% 558,48
gasolnone 39977 0 0.53% 850,75 3871 0 1.72% 1194,38
gasolbest 41307 13197 0.72% 933,66 4676 2692 3.28% 1313,36
Table 2: Overall gains in gas and bytes-size and overheads
marked as \{" in the gures. Experiments have been performed on an Intel Core
i7-7700T at 4.2GHz x 8 and 64Gb of memory, running Ubuntu 16.04.
The benchmark set. We have downloaded the last 30 veried smart contracts
from Etherscan that were compiled using the version 8 of solc and whose source
code was available as of June 21, 2021. The reason for this selection is twofold:
(1) we require version 8 in order to be able to apply the latest solc optimizer and
start from a worst-case scenario in which we have the most possible optimized
version and, this way, assess if there is room for further optimization and, in
particular, for the two types of gains achievable by GASOL (see Sec. 1 ), (2)
we want to make a random choice (e.g., the last 30) rather than picking up
contracts favorable to us. The benchmarks in [ 7] require using an old version
of the compiler (at most 4), hence the last solc optimizer cannot be activated.
The source code of GASOL as well as the smart contracts analyzed are available
athttps://github.com/costa-group/gasol-optimizer . We provide the results of
analyzing the compiled smart contracts generated by the version 0.8.9 of solc with
the complete optimization options. The total number of blocks, given by BLK,
for the 30 contracts is 12,378. Within them, there are 1,044 SSTORE instructions,
6,631 MSTORE and 43 MSTORE8. These memory instructions are used by SYRUP to
split the basic blocks, while GASOL does not split them always as explained above.
This results on 15,416 blocks when considering the additional 24-partitioning,
13,030 without partitioning at stores by gasolnone, and 20,467 blocks by syrupcav
and gasolall. As in [ 7] all tools split blocks at instructions like LOGX or CODECOPY .
Eciency gains and performance overhead. Table2 shows the overall gas and
size gains and the optimization time (in minutes). The total gas consumed by all
contracts before running the optimizers is 7,538,907, and the bytes-size is 224,540.
As it is customary, we are calculating such gas (resp. size) as the sum of the gas
(resp. size) consumed by all EVM instructions in the considered contracts. 4 For
those EVM instructions that do not consume a constant and xed amount of gas,
such as SSTORE, EXP or SHA3, we choose the lower bound that they may consume.
Column Gnormal refers to the gains for the blocks that do not timeout giving no
solution, Gtimeout represents the gas saved by the optimized blocks that reached
the timeout in gasolnone with no result (note that Gnormal is the complementary
of Gtimeout), and Gtotal the total gains computed as the sum of the previous
two, given as a percentage wrt. the initial gas consumption. Columns B have the
analogous meanings for size and T gives the time in minutes. The rst observation
is that our proposal of using dependencies in gasolall pays o, as we achieve larger
4 Estimating the actual gains of executing transactions on the involved contracts is a
research problem on its own which has been subject of other work, e.g., [ 6,16,19,24].
E. Albert et al.214

#B Alrg Optg Betg Nong T outg Alrb Optb Betb Nonb T outb
syrupcav 20467 70.54 27.01 0.47 0.08 1.9 { { { { {
gasolall 20467 70.63 27.36 0.64 0.35 1.02 83.25 12.83 1.2 0.69 2.03
gasol24 15416 62.2 33.79 1.47 0.91 1.63 75.48 16.29 3.21 1.78 3.24
gasolnone 13030 65.48 25.3 3.81 0.34 5.07 73.44 11.7 3.1 2.57 9.19
Table 3: Optimization report (%) for SYRUP and GASOL
gains than syrupcav in less time. The second observation is that the gains in gas
of GASOL are notably larger for blocks that do not time out Gnormal, as a larger
search space can be explored. However, those blocks that would require a larger
timeout might behave worse than the syrupcav and gasolall versions working on
smaller blocks, as the original bytecode is taken as the optimization result in case
of timeout. This sometimes happens in the version gasol24, and more often in
gasolnone. The problem is exacerbated for the bytes-size criterion because larger
blocks are considered as a result of skipping size-increasing simplication rules.
Even in Bnormal the gain is smaller for gasolnone than for gasol24. This is because
Bnormal includes timeouts for which a solution is found. Our solution to mitigate
the huge computation demands required in these cases is in row gasolbest that
runs in parallel gasolall, gasol24 and gasolnone and returns the best result. As it
can be seen, gasolbest clearly outperforms the other systems in gas and size gains.
As regards the overhead, it is also the most expensive option, as it reaches the
timeout more often than the other systems and these timeouts are accumulated to
the time. However, as superoptimizers are often used as oine optimization tools,
which are run only prior to deployment, we argue that the gains compensate the
further optimization time. Finally, it remains to be investigated the interaction
between the two optimization criteria, namely how the reduction in bytes-size
aects the gas consumption and vice versa.
Impact of phases 1 and 2. We would also like to estimate how much is gained in
gasolbest by applying the simplication rules and how much is gained by the SMT
encoding. Regarding the simplication rules on memory, gasolbest has applied 6
rules on storage and 11 on memory: 15 of them correspond to the rule i) (4 on
storage and 11 on memory) described in Def. 2 , and 2 to the rule ii) (both on
storage). Rule iii) is never applied on this benchmark set, but we have applied
it when optimizing other real smart contracts. As regards the percentage of the
gains, 14.6% of the gas savings come from applying the memory rules, 34.4%
from the stack rules and 51% is saved by the use of the Max-SMT solver. As
in [7], the gains due to each phase are roughly half (i.e., 50% each). Regarding the
simplication rules on stack for the gas criterion, their application has increased
11.4% in gasolbest because it works on larger blocks and has more opportunities
to apply them. However, when selecting the bytes-size criteria, there are less
simplication rules applied (namely 96% less) as when the rules generate larger
code in terms of size they are not applied (see Sec. 4.3 ).
Optimality results. Table3 provides additional detailed information, which is
also part of the optimization report of Fig. 1 . Column #B shows the total
number of blocks analyzed in each case, depending on the partitioning. In the
remaining columns, we show the percentages of: Column Alr blocks that are
A Max-SMT Superoptimizer for EVM handling Memory and Storage 215

already optimal, i.e., those blocks that cannot be optimized because they already
consume the minimal amount of gas; Opt blocks that have been optimized and
the SMT solver has proved the optimality of the solution, i.e., they consume
the minimum amount of gas needed to generate the provided SMS; Bet blocks
that have been optimized and therefore, consume less gas than the original ones,
but the solution is not proved to be optimal; Non blocks that have not been
optimized and the solver has not been able to prove if they are optimal, i.e., the
solution found is the original one but it may exist a better one; Tout blocks
where the solver reached the timeout without nding a model. The subscripts b
are the analogous for the bytes-size criterion. We can observe in the table that
gasolnone times out in more cases due to the larger sizes of the blocks that it
optimizes, but the percentages of blocks for which it nds a better and optimal
solution are notably high. It should also be noted that the results of SYRUP (and
gasolall) and, to a lesser extent, of gasol24 wrt. optimality are weaker. This is
because they work on strictly smaller blocks and hence they can prove optimality
for the partitioned blocks, but when glued together, the optimality may be lost.
This is also the reason why the results for gasolbest are not included, because it
mixes dierent notions of optimality and the concepts are not well-dened. Due
to this weaker optimality, the Opt and Bet results are only slightly better for
GASOL than for SYRUP. However, the truly important aspect is that the actual
gas and size gains for GASOL in Table2 are notably larger.
6 Conclusions and Future Work
We have presented GASOLv2, a Max-SMT based superoptimizer for Ethereum
smart contracts that uses the assembly json exchange format of the solc compiler
for a direct integration into it. GASOLv2 extends the Max-SMT approach of
SYRUP [7] with memory and storage operations, which constitute the most chal-
lenging and relevant features left out in SYRUP's approach. GASOLv2 is part of
the GASOL project [ 3] that aims at developing a GAS Optimization tooLkit that
will integrate inter-block optimizations [5] as well. Namely, the initial optimizer [5]
of the GASOL project uses inter-block analysis to detect storage accesses that can
be replaced by cheaper memory accesses, thus making global optimizations that
are orthogonal and complementary to our intra-block ones. As part of our future
work, we plan to investigate potential synergies among the dierent proposals
to optimization for smart contracts. This includes also the cooperation with the
solc optimizer [4] that incorporates classical compiler optimizations (e.g., dead
code elimination, constant propagation, etc.) from which our superoptimizer
is already beneting (since we are applying the solc optimizer). In the other
order of application, we expect also gains when applying classical analyses after
superoptimization. For instance, we have also observed that after applying rule
simplication (i) in Def. 2 and eliminating load instructions, we might leave
store operations on memory locations that will never be accessed again, and that
could be eliminated afterwards by applying an inter-block analysis ensuring that
there are no further access to such memory location. The combination of the
techniques and tools thus seems a promising direction for future research.
E. Albert et al.216

References
1. Compiler Input and Output JSON Description.
https://docs.soliditylang.org/en/v0.8.7/using-the-compiler.html#compiler-
input-and-output-json-description.
2. Welfare contract. https://etherscan.io/address/
0x3E873439949793e8c577E08629c36Ed8c184e7D9#code.
3. GASOL { A GAS Optimization tooLkit, 2021. Funded by the Ethereum Foundation
https://blog.ethereum.org/2021/07/01/esp-allocation-update-q1-2021/ .
4. The solc optimizer, 2021. https://docs.soliditylang.org/en/v0.8.7/internals/
optimizer.html.
5. Elvira Albert, Jes us Correas, Pablo Gordillo, Guillermo Rom an-D ez, and Albert
Rubio. GASOL: Gas Analysis and Optimization for Ethereum Smart Contracts. In
Armin Biere and David Parker, editors,Proceedings of 26th International Conference
on Tools and Algorithms for the Construction and Analysis of Systems, TACAS
2020, volume 12079 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science , pages 118{125, 2020.
6. Elvira Albert, Jes us Correas, Pablo Gordillo, Guillermo Rom an-D ez, and Albert
Rubio. Don't run on fumes|parametric gas bounds for smart contracts. Journal
of Systems and Software , 176:110923, 2021.
7. Elvira Albert, Pablo Gordillo, Albert Rubio, and Maria A. Schett. Synthesis of
super-optimized smart contracts using max-smt. In Shuvendu K. Lahiri and Chao
Wang, editors, Computer Aided Verication - 32nd International Conference, CAV
2020, Los Angeles, CA, USA, July 21-24, 2020, Proceedings, Part I , volume 12224
of Lecture Notes in Computer Science , pages 177{200. Springer, 2020.
8. Elvira Albert, Pablo Gordillo, Albert Rubio, and Ilya Sergey. Running on Fumes:
Preventing Out-Of-Gas Vulnerabilities in Ethereum Smart Contracts using Static
Resource Analysis. In 13th International Conference on Verication and Evaluation
of Computer and Communication Systems, VECoS 2019. Proceedings , volume 11847
of LNCS, pages 63{78. Springer, 2019.
9. Rajeev Alur, Rastislav Bod k, Garvit Juniwal, Milo M. K. Martin, Mukund
Raghothaman, Sanjit A. Seshia, Rishabh Singh, Armando Solar-Lezama, Em-
ina Torlak, and Abhishek Udupa. Syntax-guided synthesis. In Formal Methods in
Computer-Aided Design, FMCAD 2013, Portland, OR, USA, October 20-23, 2013 ,
pages 1{8. IEEE, 2013.
10. Sorav Bansal and Alex Aiken. Automatic generation of peephole superoptimizers.
In John Paul Shen and Margaret Martonosi, editors, Proceedings of the 12th
International Conference on Architectural Support for Programming Languages and
Operating Systems, ASPLOS 2006, San Jose, CA, USA, October 21-25, 2006 , pages
394{403. ACM, 2006.
11. Sorav Bansal and Alex Aiken. Binary translation using peephole superoptimizers.
In Richard Draves and Robbert van Renesse, editors, 8th USENIX Symposium on
Operating Systems Design and Implementation, OSDI 2008, December 8-10, 2008,
San Diego, California, USA, Proceedings , pages 177{192. USENIX Association,
2008.
12. James Bornholt, Emina Torlak, Dan Grossman, and Luis Ceze. Optimizing synthesis
with metasketches. In Rastislav Bod k and Rupak Majumdar, editors, Proceed-
ings of the 43rd Annual ACM SIGPLAN-SIGACT Symposium on Principles of
Programming Languages, POPL 2016, St. Petersburg, FL, USA, January 20 - 22,
2016, pages 775{788. ACM, 2016.
A Max-SMT Superoptimizer for EVM handling Memory and Storage 217

13. Alessandro Cimatti, Alberto Griggio, Bastiaan Joost Schaafsma, and Roberto
Sebastiani. The mathsat5 SMT solver. In Tools and Algorithms for the Construction
and Analysis of Systems - 19th International Conference, TACAS 2013. Proceedings,
pages 93{107, 2013.
14. F. Contro, M. Crosara, M. Ceccato, and M. Dalla Preda. Ethersolve: Computing
an accurate control-ow graph from ethereum bytecode. In 29th IEEE/ACM
International Conference on Program Comprehension, ICPC 2021, Madrid, Spain,
May 20-21, 2021 , pages 127{137. IEEE, 2021.
15. Torbj orn Granlund and Richard Kenner. Eliminating branches using a superopti-
mizer and the GNU C compiler. In Stuart I. Feldman and Richard L. Wexelblat,
editors, Proceedings of the ACM SIGPLAN'92 Conference on Programming Lan-
guage Design and Implementation (PLDI), San Francisco, California, USA, June
17-19, 1992, pages 341{352. ACM, 1992.
16. Neville Grech, Michael Kong, Anton Jurisevic, Lexi Brent, Bernhard Scholz, and
Yannis Smaragdakis. MadMax: surviving out-of-gas conditions in Ethereum smart
contracts. PACMPL, 2(OOPSLA):116:1{116:27, 2018.
17. Sumit Gulwani, Susmit Jha, Ashish Tiwari, and Ramarathnam Venkatesan. Synthe-
sis of loop-free programs. In Mary W. Hall and David A. Padua, editors, Proceedings
of the 32nd ACM SIGPLAN Conference on Programming Language Design and
Implementation, PLDI 2011, San Jose, CA, USA, June 4-8, 2011 , pages 62{73.
ACM, 2011.
18. Abhinav Jangda and Greta Yorsh. Unbounded superoptimization. In Proceedings of
the 2017 ACM SIGPLAN International Symposium on New Ideas, New Paradigms,
and Reections on Programming and Software, Onward! 2017, Vancouver, BC,
Canada, October 23 - 27, 2017 , pages 78{88, 2017.
19. Matteo Marescotti, Martin Blicha, Antti E. J. Hyv arinen, Sepideh Asadi, and
Natasha Sharygina. Computing Exact Worst-Case Gas Consumption for Smart
Contracts. In ISoLA, volume 11247 of LNCS, pages 450{465. Springer, 2018.
20. Henry Massalin. Superoptimizer - A look at the smallest program. In Proceedings
of the Second International Conference on Architectural Support for Programming
Languages and Operating Systems (ASPLOS II) , pages 122{126, 1987.
21. Julian Nagele and Maria A Schett. Blockchain superoptimizer. In Preproceedings
of 29th International Symposium on Logic-based Program Synthesis and Transfor-
mation (LOPSTR 2019) , 2019.https://arxiv.org/abs/2005.05912 .
22. Raimondas Sasnauskas, Yang Chen, Peter Collingbourne, Jeroen Ketema, Gratian
Lup, Jubi Taneja, and John Regehr. Souper: A Synthesizing Superoptimizer.
arXiv:1711.04422 [cs], November 2017.
23. Gavin Wood. Ethereum: A secure decentralised generalised transaction ledger,
2019.
24. Renlord Yang, Toby Murray, Paul Rimba, and Udaya Parampalli. Empirically
analyzing ethereum's gas mechanism. In 2019 IEEE European Symposium on
Security and Privacy Workshops, EuroS&P Workshops 2019, Stockholm, Sweden,
June 17-19, 2019 , pages 310{319, 2019.
Open Access This chapter is licensed under the terms of the Creative Commons
Attribution 4.0 International License ( http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/),
which permits use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or
format, as long as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source,
provide a link to the Creative Commons license and indicate if changes were made.
E. Albert et al.218

The images or other third party material in this chapter are included in the chapter's
Creative Commons license, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If
material is not included in the chapter's Creative Commons license and your intended
use is not permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need
to obtain permission directly from the copyright holder.
A Max-SMT Superoptimizer for EVM handling Memory and Storage 219