# eThor: Practical and Provably Sound Static Analysis of Ethereum Smart Contracts
DOI: 10.1145/3372297.3417250
Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2005.06227 (pdf)
[TRUNCATED to 60000 chars]
======================================================================

eThor: Practical and Provably Sound Static Analysis
of Ethereum Smart Contracts
Clara Schneidewind
Ilya Grishchenko
Markus Scherer
Matteo Maffei
TU Wien
{clara.schneidewind,markus.scherer,ilya.grishchenko,matteo.maffei}@tuwien.ac.at
ABSTRACT
Ethereum has emerged as the most popular smart contract develop-
ment platform, with hundreds of thousands of contracts stored on
the blockchain and covering a variety of application scenarios, such
as auctions, trading platforms, and so on. Given their financial na-
ture, security vulnerabilities may lead to catastrophic consequences
and, even worse, they can be hardly fixed as data stored on the
blockchain, including the smart contract code itself, are immutable.
An automated security analysis of these contracts is thus of utmost
interest, but at the same time technically challenging for a variety
of reasons, such as the specific transaction-oriented programming
mechanisms, which feature a subtle semantics, and the fact that the
blockchain data which the contract under analysis interacts with,
including the code of callers and callees, are not statically known.
In this work, we present eThor, the first sound and automated
static analyzer for EVM bytecode, which is based on an abstraction
of the EVM bytecode semantics based on Horn clauses. In particular,
our static analysis supports reachability properties, which we show
to be sufficient for capturing interesting security properties for
smart contracts (e.g., single-entrancy) as well as contract-specific
functional properties. Our analysis is proven sound against a com-
plete semantics of EVM bytecode and an experimental large-scale
evaluation on real-world contracts demonstrates thateThor is practi-
cal and outperforms the state-of-the-art static analyzers: specifically,
eThor is the only one to provide soundness guarantees, terminates
on 95% of a representative set of real-world contracts, and achieves
an F-measure (which combines sensitivity and specificity) of 89%.
1 INTRODUCTION
Smart contracts introduced a radical paradigm shift in distributed
computation, promising security in an adversarial setting thanks
to the underlying consensus algorithm. Software developers can
implement sophisticated distributed, transaction-based computa-
tions by leveraging the scripting language offered by the underlying
blockchain technology. While many cryptocurrencies have an in-
tentionally limited scripting language (e.g., Bitcoin [41]), Ethereum
was designed from the ground up with a quasi Turing-complete
language1. Ethereum smart contracts have thus found a variety
of appealing use cases, such as auctions [ 27], data management
1While the language itself is Turing complete, computations are associated with a
bounded computational budget (called gas), which gets consumed by each instruction
thereby enforcing termination.
Accepted for ACM CCS, 2020
.
systems [9], financial contracts [15], elections [40], trading plat-
forms [39, 43], permission management [13] and verifiable cloud
computing [20], just to mention a few. Given their financial nature,
bugs and vulnerabilities in smart contracts may lead to catastrophic
consequences. For instance, the infamous DAO vulnerability [1]
recently led to a 60M$ financial loss and similar vulnerabilities oc-
cur on a regular basis [2, 3]. Furthermore, many smart contracts in
the wild are intentionally fraudulent, as highlighted in a recent sur-
vey [12]. Even worse, due to the unmodifiable nature of blockchains,
bugs or vulnerabilities in deployed smart contracts cannot be fixed.
A rigorous security analysis of smart contracts is thus crucial for
the trust of the society in blockchain technologies and their wide-
spread deployment. Unfortunately, this task is quite challenging
for various reasons. First, Ethereum smart contracts are developed
in an ad-hoc language, called Solidity, which resembles JavaScript
but features non-standard semantic behaviours and transaction-
oriented mechanisms, which complicate smart contract develop-
ment and verification. Second, smart contracts are uploaded on
the blockchain in the form of Ethereum Virtual Machine (EVM)
bytecode, a stack-based low-level code featuring very little static
information, which makes it extremely difficult to analyze. Finally,
most of the data available at runtime on the blockchain, including
the contracts which the contract under analysis may interact with,
may not be known statically, which requires ad-hoc abstraction
techniques. As a result, while effective bug finding tools for smart
contracts have been recently presented, there exists at present no
automated security analysis for EVM bytecode that provides formal se-
curity guarantees (i.e., absence of false negatives, as proven against
a formal semantics of EVM bytecode), as further detailed below.
1.1 State-of-the-art in Security Analysis of
Smart Contracts
Existing approaches to smart contract analysis can be mainly classi-
fied as interactive frameworks for semantic-based machine-checked
proofs [11, 14, 25, 29, 30, 49] and automated, heuristic-driven bug
finding tools [23, 35, 38, 42, 50].
Some recent works try to fill the middle ground between these
two approaches, aiming at the best of the two worlds, i.e., an au-
tomated, yet sound static analysis of Ethereum smart contracts
that can prove generic security properties [24, 34, 37, 48]. We con-
ducted a thorough investigation, finding out that all of them fail
to provide the intended soundness guarantees, which showcases
the difficulty of this task. In the following, we further expand on
this point, highlighting the particular challenges that occur in the
1
arXiv:2005.06227v1  [cs.PL]  13 May 2020

Accepted for ACM CCS, 2020 Clara Schneidewind, Ilya Grishchenko, Markus Scherer, and Matteo Maffei
process of designing a sound static analysis tool for Ethereum smart
contracts.
Semantic foundations. A first fundamental limitation of most
existing static analysis tools is that they do not establish a formal
connection with a semantic model of smart contract execution.
ZEUS [34] leverages existing symbolic model checking tools for
LLVM bitcode in order to analyze contracts written in Solidity. To
this end, ZEUS first translates Solidity code into an abstract inter-
mediate language and in a next step into LLVM bitcode. However,
upto now, there is no complete formal semantics of the Solidity
language, hence making it impossible to prove the performed trans-
lation to be semantics-preserving and consequently to derive formal
guarantees from the results of the LLVM model checking. This can
easily lead to flaws, as confirmed by the theoretical investigation
conducted in [24] as well as by empirical evidence provided in [47],
which contradict the original soundness claim [34]. [24] reviews a
theoretical approach to a static analysis technique based on Horn
clauses which is claimed to be provably sound, still we could find
sources of unsoundness in the presented abstraction as detailed in
§ D.4. Securify [48] is an abstract interpreter working at the level
of EVM bytecode that also aims to offer soundness guarantees: un-
fortunately, it does not come with any formal semantics or proof of
soundness, which leads to both false positives and false negatives,
as discussed below.
Formal security properties. As hinted in the previous paragraph,
for providing reliable guarantees, not only the analysis but also the
security properties have to be formalized in the underlying seman-
tic model. All reportedly sound tools do not accomplish that. While
for ZEUS the intended properties are just informally described, Se-
curify comes with an ad-hoc formalism for characterizing security
properties of smart contracts. This, however, is not related to a
formal EVM bytecode semantics, nor are the security patterns that
are used in the analysis to determine the fulfillment and violation of
these properties2 provably related to such formal characterization.
This omission results in the lack of soundness and completeness
guarantees, as we illustrate in § D.2 by providing counterexam-
ples for the majority of the proposed patterns. Similarly, the tool
NeuCheck [37] performs a purely syntactic analysis on Solidity
source code and defines security properties by syntactic patterns
on the smart contract’s syntax tree. These patterns cannot be related
to any semantic property due to a lacking formalism, and can be
shown to be neither necessary nor sufficient for the corresponding
security properties, see § D.3.
Correct control flow reconstruction. Analyzing EVM bytecode
is particularly challenging as the underlying execution model al-
lows for dynamic jump destinations. Most works [ 10, 38, 44, 48]
reconstruct the control flow of a given smart contract before the
analysis. However, recovering jump destinations is interconnected
with the contract’s execution, and hence, performing such a sound
reconstruction is not trivial. For instance, [48] uses a custom algo-
rithm – whose correctness is never discussed – for doing so. Indeed
2[48] introduces compliance and violation patterns for security properties where a
contract matching a compliance pattern is meant to satisfy the property and a contract
matching a violation pattern to violate it.
we found an example showing that this algorithm yields unsound
results(see § D.1), undermining the soundness of the analysis.
Practicality. A useful, automated analysis tool needs to be per-
formant, not only in terms of overall execution time, but also in
terms of precision. This is particularly challenging as the soundness
goal prevents the use of (potentially cheap and fast) heuristics to
guide the analysis, but instead requires the chosen abstractions to
provably over-approximate the set of all possible executions. Ap-
propriate abstractions hence need to be sound, but still efficiently
encodable and precise enough to account for a contract’s safety.
Benchmarking, testing, and community validation. The previous
problems which affect the design of reliable analysis tools are ag-
gravated by the fact that there is no reliable and comparable bench-
marking or testing infrastructure for Ethereum smart contract anal-
ysis tools. One reason for that is the lack of clear definitions for the
generic security properties targeted by the analysis tools in the first
place. Another explanation is the difficulty of manually investigat-
ing the bytecode of real-world contracts for assessing their ground
truth. Even though the existing works evaluate their performance
on real world smart contracts (fetched from the blockchain), the
used ground truth is spurious: While [48] reports quality metrics
only on a dataset of 100 contracts which are not made available, [34]
presents results on a dataset encompassing over 1500 contracts from
the blockchain. When manually investigating this dataset, however,
we found several issues ranging from non-existing contracts to
deviating ground truths. These problems are detailed in § 5.
Inspired by the issues that we see in the state of the art, we
introduce a principled approach to the design and implementation
of a sound, yet performant, static analysis tool for EVM bytecode.
1.2 Our Contributions
The contributions of this work can be summarized as follows:
• We design the first provably sound static analyzer for EVM
bytecode, which builds on top of a reachability analysis real-
ized by Horn clause resolution. We show that a reachability
analysis suffices to verify various interesting security proper-
ties for smart contracts as well as contract-specific functional
properties via an encoding into Hoare-style reasoning. The
design of such static analysis is technically challenging, since
it requires careful abstractions of various EVM components
(e.g., the stack-based execution model, the gas used to bound
the smart contract execution, and the memory model) as
well as a dedicated over-approximation of the data stored
on the blockchain, which is not statically known and yet the
contract under analysis can interact with (e.g., the code of
other contracts which may act both as callers and callees);
• We prove the soundness of our static analysis technique
against the semantics of EVM bytecode formalized by Gr-
ishchenko et al. [25];
• In order to facilitate future refinements of our analysis, as
well as the design of similar static analyses for other lan-
guages, we design and implementHoRSt, a framework for the
specification and implementation of static analyses based on
Horn clause resolution. Specifically, HoRSt takes as input a
2

eThor: Practical and Provably Sound Static Analysis
of Ethereum Smart Contracts Accepted for ACM CCS, 2020
(pen-and-paper like) specification of the Horn clauses defin-
ing the static analysis and produces a smt-lib [8] encoding
suitable for z3 [31], which includes various optimizations
such as Horn clause and constant folding;
• We useHoRSt to implement the static analyzereThor. To gain
confidence in the resulting implementation, we encode the
relevant semantic tests (604 in total) of the official EVM suite
as reachability properties, against which we successfully test
the soundness and precision of eThor;
• We conduct a large-scale experimental evaluation on real-
world contract data comparing eThor to the state-of-the-art
analyzer ZEUS [34] which claims to provide soundness guar-
antees. While ZEUS shows a remarkable specificity (i.e., com-
pleteness) of 99.8%, eThor clearly outperforms ZEUS in terms
of recall (i.e., soundness) – 100% vs. 11.4% – which empiri-
cally refutes ZEUS’ soundness claim. With a specificity of
80%, eThor results in an overall performance of 88.9% (ac-
cording to the F-measure) as compared to ZEUS’ F-measure
of 20.4%.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. § 2 reviews
Ethereum and the semantics of EVM bytecode. § 3 introduces our
static reachability analysis, specifies its soundness guarantee and
discusses relevant smart contract properties in scope of the analy-
sis. § 4 introduces the specification language HoRSt. § 5 describes
eThor and presents our experimental evaluation. § 7 concludes by
discussing interesting future research directions. The appendix pro-
vides proofs and additional material. The source code of eThor and
HoRSt with the dataset used in the experimental evaluation are
available online [6].
2 ETHEREUM
We first introduce the required background on Ethereum (§ 2.1)
and then overview an existing semantics of EVM bytecode (§ 2.2),
which this work builds on.
2.1 Background
The Ethereum platform can be seen as a transaction-based state
machine where transactions alter the global state of the system,
which consists of accounts. There are two types of accounts: Ex-
ternal accounts, which are owned by a user of the system, and
contract accounts, which can be seen as a distributed program. All
accounts hold a balance in the virtual currency Ether. Additionally,
contract accounts include persistent storage and the contract’s code.
Transactions can either create new contract accounts or call exist-
ing accounts. Calls to external accounts can only transfer Ether to
this account, but calls to contract accounts additionally execute the
account’s contract code. The contract execution might influence the
storage of the account and might as well perform new transactions
– in this case, we speak of internal transactions. The effects of con-
tract executions are determined by the Ethereum Virtual Machine
(EVM). This virtual machine characterizes thequasi Turing complete
execution model of Ethereum smart contracts where the otherwise
Turing complete execution is restricted by an upfront defined re-
source gas that effectively limits the number of execution steps. A
transaction’s originator can specify an upper bound on the gas that
she is willing to pay for the contract execution and also sets the gas
Callstacks S := EXC : :U | HALT(σ, gas, d,η) : :U | U
Plain callstacks U := (µ,ι,σ,η) : :U |ϵ
Machine states µ := (gas, pc, m, i, s)
Account states a := (n, b, code, stor)
Figure 1: Grammar for calls stacks
price (the amount of Ether to pay for a unit of gas). The originator
then prepays the specified gas limit and gets refunded according to
the remaining gas in case of successful contract execution.
EVM bytecode. Contracts are published on the blockchain in
form of EVM bytecode– an Assembler like bytecode language. The
EVM is a stack-based machine and specifies the semantics of byte-
code instructions. Consequently, EVM bytecode mainly consists of
standard instructions for stack operations, arithmetics, jumps and
local memory access. The instruction set is complemented with
blockchain-specific instructions such as an opcode for the SHA3
hash and several opcodes for accessing information on the current
(internal) transaction. In addition, there are opcodes for accessing
and modifying the storage of the executing account and distinct
opcodes for initiating internal transactions.
Each instruction is associated with (a potentially environment-
dependent) gas cost. If the up-front defined gas-limit is exceeded
during execution, the transaction execution halts exceptionally and
the effects of the current transaction on the global state are reverted.
For nested transactions, an exception only reverts the effects of the
executing transaction, but not those of the calling transactions.
Solidity. In practice, Ethereum smart contracts are shipped and exe-
cuted in EVM bytecode format but are, for a large part, written in the
high-level language Solidity, which is developed by the Ethereum
Foundation [5]. The syntax of Solidity resembles JavaScript, en-
riched with additional primitives accounting for the distributed
setting of Ethereum. Solidity exhibits specific features that give rise
to smart contract vulnerabilities, as will be in discussed in § 2.3. We
will not give a full account of Solidity’s language features here, but
add explanations throughout the paper when needed.
2.2 EVM Semantics
Our static analysis targets a recently introduced small-step seman-
tics for EVM bytecode [25], which we shortly review below.3
The semantics of EVM bytecode is given by a small-step relation
Γ ⊨ S → S ′ that encompasses the possible steps that a callstack
S, representing the overall state of a contract execution, can make
under the transaction environment Γ. The transaction environment
Γ summarizes static information about the transaction execution
such as the information on the block that the transaction is part
of and transaction-specific information such as gas price or limit.
We write Γ ⊨ S →∗ S ′ for the reflexive transitive closure of the
small-step relation and call the pair (Γ, S) a configuration.
Configurations. The most important formal components of EVM
configurations are summarized in Figure 1.
3More recent changes to the EVM semantics such as the introduction of STATICCALL,
CREATE, and CREATE2, are not explicitly mentioned in this paper, but covered by our
static analysis as specified in [6].
3

Accepted for ACM CCS, 2020 Clara Schneidewind, Ilya Grishchenko, Markus Scherer, and Matteo Maffei
Global State. Ethereum’s global stateσis formally captured as
a (partial) mapping from account addresses to account states. An
account state consists of a nonce n that is incremented with every
other account that the account creates, a balance b, a persistent
storage stor, and the account’scode. External accounts have no code
and hence cannot access storage.
Callstacks. The overall state of an external transaction is cap-
tured by a stack of execution states that we will refer to ascallstack.
The individual execution states reflect the states of the pending
internal transactions. More formally, the elements of a callstack are
either regular execution states of the form (µ,ι,σ,η) or terminal
execution states HALT(σ, gas, d,η) and EXC which can only occur
as stack top elements. For terminated executions we differentiate
between exceptional halting (EXC), which will revert all effects of
the transaction, and regular halting HALT(σ, gas, d,η), in which
case the effects of the transaction are captured by the global state
σat the point of halting, the gas remaining from the execution, the
return data d, and the transaction effectsη(effects that will only be
applied after completing the external execution).
The state of a non-terminated internal transaction is described
by a regular execution state of the form (µ,ι,σ,η). During execu-
tion, this state tracks the current global stateσof the system, the
execution environmentιto the internal transaction (which specifies
parameters such as the input to the transaction and the code to be
executed) as well as the local stateµof the stack machine, and the
transaction effectsηthat will be applied after transaction execution.
The local machine state µreflects the state of the stack ma-
chine that handles local computations. It is represented by a tuple
(gas, pc, m, i, s) holding the amount of gas available for execution,
the program counter pc, the local memory m, the number of active
words in memory i, and the machine stack s. As the stack machine
models local computations, the execution of every new (internal)
transaction starts again in a fresh machine state at program counter
zero with an empty stack and zero-initialized memory. Only the gas
value is initialized as specified by the initiator of the transaction.
Small-step Rules. We illustrate the mechanics of the EVM byte-
code semantics by an example and refer to [25] for a full definition.
Local instructions, e.g., ADD, only operate on the machine state:
ι.code [µ.pc] = ADD µ.s = a : :b : :s
µ.gas ≥ 3 µ′ = µ[s → (a + b) : :s][pc += 1][gas −= 3]
Γ ⊨ (µ,ι,σ,η) : :S → (µ′,ι,σ,η) : :S
Given a stack that contains at least two values and given a sufficient
amount of gas (here 3 units), an ADD instruction takes two values
from the stack and pushes their sum. These effects, as well as the
advancement in the program counter and the substraction of the
gas cost, are reflected in the updated machine stateµ′.
A more evolved semantics is exhibited by the class of transaction
initiating instructions (CALL, CALLCODE and DELEGATECALL,
CREATE). Intuitively, CALL executes the callee’s code in its own
environment, CALLCODE executes the callee’s code in the caller’s
environment, which might be useful to call libraries implemented
in a separate contract, and DELEGATECALL takes a step further
by preserving not only the caller’s environment but even part of
the environment of the previous call (e.g., the sender information),
which effectively treats the callee’s code as an internal function
of the caller’s code. Finally, the CREATE instruction initiates an
internal transaction that creates a new account.
Instructions from this set are particularly difficult to analyze,
since their arguments are dynamically evaluated and the execution
environment has to be tracked and properly modified across dif-
ferent calls. Furthermore, it can well be that the code of a called
function is not accessible at analysis time, e.g., because the contract
allows for money transfers to a dynamic set of contracts (like in
the DAO contract as will be discussed in the next section).
2.3 Security Properties of Smart Contracts
Ethereum smart contracts have undergone several severe attacks in
the past that where enabled by major bugs in the contract code, most
prominently the DAO hack [1]. Interestingly, this bug can be traced
back to the violation of a generic security property of the attacked
contract, called single-entrancy. We will shortly present the class
of reentrancy attacks and the corresponding security property.
Preliminary Notions. In order to present security properties in a
concise fashion, the previously presented small-step semantics is
augmented with an annotation to callstack elements that reflects
the currently executed contract. We say that an execution states
is strongly consistent with annotation c if s executes c (according
to the execution environment) and c is present in the global state
of s. Further, for arguing about EVM bytecode executions, we are
only interested in those initial configurations that might result
from a valid external transaction in a valid block. We call these
configurations reachable and refer to [25] for a detailed definition.
Single-entrancy. For motivating the definition of single-entrancy,
we introduce a class of bugs in Ethereum smart contracts called
reentrancy bugs [12, 38]. Reentrancy attacks exploit that a contract
which hands over control to another contract by calling it can
be called back (reentered) before completing the original internal
transaction. At the point of reentering the contract can then be in
an inconsistent state which allows for unintended behavior. In the
DAO hack, the attacker stole all funds of the contract by reentering
the contract and sending money to itself. We exemplify this kind of
attack by the Bank contract in Figure 2: this has a basic reentrancy
protection in place which however can easily be circumvented.
The Bank contract implements a simple banking functionality,
keeping the balance of all users (identified by their addresses) in
the mapping bal. We only discuss the contract function drain which
allows a user to transfer all its money from its bank account to the
provided beneficiary address a. For protecting against reentrancy,
the drain function implements a simple locking functionality: it is
only entered in case the lock is not taken . Otherwise it takes the lock
(using function take), transfers the remaining balance of the function
callee (denoted by msg.sender) to the beneficiary addressa, updates the
user’s balance, and releases the lock again. One needs to note that
the call construct (being translated to a CALL instruction in EVM
bytecode) does not only trigger the value transfer, but also invokes
the execution of the callee’s so-calledfallback function (written as
a function without name or argument in Solidity as depicted in the
Mallory contract in Figure 2). Hence, the use of a call can cause the
the executed contract to be reentered during execution, potentially
undermining the contract integrity. The locking mechanism should
prevent this problem by causing an exception in case the contract
4

eThor: Practical and Provably Sound Static Analysis
of Ethereum Smart Contracts Accepted for ACM CCS, 2020
1
2
3
4
5
Figure 2: Reentrancy Attack.
is reentered (indicated by the lock being taken). However, since the
locking functionality is publicly accessible, a reentrancy attack (as
depicted in Figure 2) is still possible: An attacker calling the drain
function (via Mallory) with Mallory’s address as argument (1 ) transfers
all of Mallory’s money back to her and executes her fallback function
( 2 ). Mallory then first calls the public release function to release the
lock ( 3 ) and next calls thedrain function of Bank again ( 4 ). Since the
attacker’s balance has not been updated yet at this point, another
transfer of the prior amount to Mallory can be performed ( 5 ). These
steps can be continued until running out of gas or reaching the
callstack limit. In both cases the last value transfer is rolled back,
but the effects of all former internal transactions persist, leaving
the contract Bank drained-out.
The security property ruling out these attacks is called single-
entrancy and is formalized below. Intuitively, a contract is single-
entrant if it cannot perform any more calls after reentering.
Definition 2.1 (Single-entrancy [25]). A contractc is single-entrant
if for all reachable configurations (Γ, sc : :S), for all s ′, s ′′, S ′
Γ ⊨ sc : :S →∗ s ′
c : :S ′ + +sc : :S
=⇒ ¬ ∃s ′′, c ′. Γ ⊨ s ′
c : :S ′ + +sc : :S →∗ s ′′
c′ : :s ′
c : :S ′ + +sc : :S
where + +denotes concatenation of callstacks. The property ex-
presses that after reentering a contractc (in states ′c ) while executing
a call initiated by the very same contract, it is not possible any-
more to perform another internal transaction (which would result
in adding another element s ′′
c ′ to the call stack). Note that the call
stack records the sequence of calling states, hence the suffix sc : :S
indicates a pending call initiated by the execution s of contract c.
Single-entrancy is particularly interesting in that it constitutes a
generic robustness property of smart contracts. In contrast, other
prominent vulnerabilities [2, 3] are caused by functional correct-
ness issues that are particular to a specific contract. For spotting
such issues, contract-specific correctness properties need to be de-
fined and verified. We discuss the formalization of such properties
in § 3.5.
3 STATIC ANALYSIS OF EVM BYTECODE
Starting from the small-step semantics presented in § 2.2, we design
a sound reachability analysis that supports (among others) the vali-
dation of the single-entrancy property. We follow the verification
chain depicted in Figure 3: For showing the executions of a contract
to satisfy some property Φ, we formulate a Horn-clause based ab-
straction that abstracts the contract execution behavior and argue
about an abstracted property over abstract executions instead. This
reasoning is sound given that all concrete small-step executions are
?
Small-step Semantics
Abstract Semantics
concrete execution
abstract execution
∀
∃
...
...
Soundness
Λ Λ
≤𝛼
𝛼
bad concrete
states
Reachability Property
Reachability Query
bad abstract
states
∀
∀
Soundness
𝛼≤
⇒ =
contract execution 
behavior property abstraction
𝛼 𝛼 𝛼 𝛼 𝛼
≤
≤
≤
≤
Λ Λ Λ Λ
Λ
Λ Λ Λ Λ
Λ Λ
Φ⊨ ?
...Λ Λ
Figure 3: Formal verification chain of eThor. ∆ ⊢Λ ∆′ denotes
that the abstract configuration ∆′ can be logically derived from ∆′
(within one step) using the Horn clauses in Λ.
modeled by some abstract execution and given that the abstracted
property over-approximates Φ.
A Horn-clause based abstraction for a small-step semantics →
is characterized by an abstraction functionαthat translates con-
crete configurations (here ) into abstract configurations (here ).
Abstract configurations are sets of predicate applications where
predicates (formally characterized by their signature S) range over
the values from abstract domains. These abstract arguments are
equipped with an order ≤ that can be canonically lifted to pred-
icates and further to abstract configurations, hence establishing
a notion of precision on the latter. Intuitively,αtranslates a con-
crete configuration into its most precise abstraction. The abstract
semantics is specified by a set of Constrained Horn clauses Λ over
the predicates from S and describes how abstract configurations
evolve during abstract execution. A Constrained Horn clause is a
logical implication that can be interpreted as an inference rule for
a predicate, consequently an abstract execution consists of logical
derivations from an abstract configuration using Λ. A Horn-clause
based abstraction constitutes a sound approximation of small-step
semantics → if every concrete (multi-step) execution →∗ ′ can
be simulated by an abstract execution: More precisely, from the
abstract configuration α( ) one can logically derive using Λ an
abstract configuration that constitutes an over-approximation of
′ (so is at least as abstract asα( ′)). A formal presentation of the
soundness statement is given in § 3.4 while a characterization in
abstract interpretation terminology is deferred to § B.1. A sound ab-
straction allows for the provable analysis of reachability properties:
Such properties can be expressed as sets of problematic configu-
rations (here ). Correspondingly, a sound abstraction for such a
property is a set of bad abstract configurations (here ) which con-
tains all possible over-approximations of the bad concrete states.
The soundness of the abstract semantics then guarantees that if no
bad abstract configuration from this set can be entered, also no bad
configuration can be reached in the concrete execution.
3.1 Main Abstractions
Our analysis abstracts from several details of the original small-step
semantics. In the following we overview the main abstractions:
Blockchain environment. The analysis describes the invocation of a
contract (in the following denoted as c∗) in an arbitrary blockchain
environment, hence is not modeling the execution environment as
5

Accepted for ACM CCS, 2020 Clara Schneidewind, Ilya Grishchenko, Markus Scherer, and Matteo Maffei
Sc ∗ ∋ p :=
| MStatepc : (N × ( N → ˆD)) × ( N → ˆD) × ( N → ˆD) × B → B
| Exc : B → B
| Halt : (N → ˆD) × B → B
pc ∈ { 0, . . . , |c ∗ .code | − 1}
ˆD := N ∪ {⊤}
Figure 4: Definition of the predicate signature Sc ∗ and the
abstract domain ˆD.
well as large fractions of the global state. Indeed, most of this infor-
mation is not statically known as the state of the blockchain at con-
tract execution cannot be reliably predicted. As a consequence, the
analysis has to deal with a high number of unknown environment
inputs in the abstract semantics. Most prominently, the behavior
of other contracts needs to be appropriately over-approximated,
which turns out to be particularly challenging since such contracts
can interact with c∗ in multitudinous ways.
Gas modelling. The contract gas consumption is not modeled. The
gas resource, which is meant to bound the contract execution, is
set by the transaction initiator and hence not necessarily known
at analysis time. For this reason, our analysis takes into account
that a contract execution might exceptionally halt at any point due
to an out-of-gas exception, which does not affect the precision of
the analysis for security properties that consider arbitrary contract
invocations (and hence arbitrary gas limits).
Memory model. In the EVM the local memory is byte-indexed, while
the machine stack holds words (encompassing 32 bytes). Conse-
quently loading a machine word from memory requires to assemble
the byte values from 32 consecutive memory cells. However, as al-
ready described in [45], in practice reasoning about this conversion
between words and bytes is hard. Therefore, we model memory in
our abstraction as a word array: this enables very cheap accesses in
case that memory is accessed at the start of a new memory word,
and otherwise just requires the combination of two memory words.
Callstack. The callstack is captured by a two-level abstraction distin-
guishing only between the original execution ofc∗ (call level 0) and
reentrancies of c∗ ultimately originating from the original execu-
tion (call level 1). This abstraction reflects that given the unknown
blockchain environment, the state of the callstack when reenter-
ing is obscure: it is unknown who initiated the reentering call and
which other internal transactions have been executed before.
3.2 Analysis Definition
In the following we formally specify our analysis by defining the
underlying Horn-clause based abstraction. An abstract configura-
tion is a set of predicate applications representing one or several
concrete configurations. Since we are interested in analyzing exe-
cutions of the contract c∗, we consider EVM configurations repre-
senting such executions, which are call stacks having an execution
state of contract c∗ as a bottom element. We abstract such a call
stack by the set of all its elements that describe executions of c∗,
reflecting the stack structure only by indicating whether a relevant
execution state represents the original execution of c∗ (call level
0) or a reentering execution that hence appears higher on the call
stack (call level 1). The individual execution states are abstracted
as predicate applications using the predicates listed in Figure 4:
A predicate application of the form MStatepc((size, s), m, stor, cℓ)
describes a regular execution of c∗ at program counter pc that has
a local stack of size size with elements as described by the mapping
s (from stack positions to elements) and a local memory m, and
the global storage of contract c∗ at this point being stor. Accord-
ingly, the predicate application Exc(cℓ) denotes that an execution
of c∗ exceptionally halted on call level cℓ and Halt(stor, cℓ) repre-
sents an execution that halted regularly on call level cℓ with the
global storage of c∗ being stor. Since during the abstract execution,
a precise modeling of all the described state components is not al-
ways possible, the argument domains of the predicates encompass
the abstract domain ˆD that enriches N with the join element ⊤
over-approximating any natural number. Formally, the described
abstractions of EVM configurations are captured by the abstraction
functionαin Figure 5 that maps call stacks into the corresponding
sets of predicates, yielding an abstract configuration.
Note that αis parametrized by c∗ and that only the callstack
elements modeling executions of c∗ are translated. The transitions
between abstract configurations (as yielded byα) are described by
an abstract semantics in the form of Constrained Horn clauses. The
abstract semantics is also specific to the contract c∗: Depending on
the EVM instructions that appear in c∗, it contains Horn clauses
that over-approximate the execution steps enabled by the corre-
sponding instructions. We hence formulate the abstract semantics
as a functionδthat maps a contract c∗ to the union over the Horn
clauses that model the individual instructions in the contract:
δ(c ∗) :=
Ø
0≤i <|c ∗ .code|
Lc ∗ .code[i]Mi
The core of the abstract semantics is defined by the instruction
abstraction function L· Mi that maps a contract instruction at position
i to a set of Horn clauses over-approximating the semantics of
the corresponding instruction. We will discuss the translation of
the ADD, MLOAD, and CALL instruction depicted in Figure 6 to
illustrate the main features of the abstract semantics.
Addition. The abstract semantics of the addition instruction (ADD)
encompasses two Horn clauses describing the successful execution
and the failure case. A prerequisite for a successful addition is the
existence of a sufficient amount of arguments on the machine stack.
In this case, the top stack values are extracted and the stack at the
next program counter (modeled by the predicate MStatepc+1) is
updated with their sum. As the stack elements, however, range over
the abstract value domain ˆD, the addition operation on N needs
to be lifted to ˆD: Following the general intuition of ⊤ represent-
ing all potential values in N, the occurrence of ⊤ as one of the
operands immediately declassifies the result to ⊤. Similar liftings
are performed for all unary, binary and comparison operators in
the instruction set. A precise definition is given in § B.2.
In accordance to the choice of not modeling gas consumption,
the Horn clause modeling, the failure case – which is common
to the abstract semantics of all instructions – does not have any
preconditions, but the instruction reachability. This rule subsumes
all other possible failure cases (such as stack over- and underflows).
Memory Access. Memory access on the level of EVM bytecode is
enabled by the MLOAD instruction which takes the memory offset
to be accessed as argument from the stack and pushes instead the
6

eThor: Practical and Provably Sound Static Analysis
of Ethereum Smart Contracts Accepted for ACM CCS, 2020
αc ∗ (S ) :=
 

∅ S =ϵ
αs (s, c ∗ .addr, cℓ) ∪αc ∗ (S ′) S = sc ∗ : :S ′ ∧ cℓ = (S ′ =ϵ) ? 0 : 1
αc ∗ (S ′) S = sc : :S ′ ∧ c , c ∗
αs (s, a, cℓ) :=
 

{MStatepc(( |s|, stackToArray(s)), toWordMem(m),σ(a).stor, cℓ)} s = ((gas, pc, m, i, s),ι,σ,η)
{Exc(cℓ)} s = EXC
{Halt(σ(a).stor, cℓ)} s = HALT(σ, gas, data,η)
∅ otherwise
stackToArray(s) :=
(
λx . 0 s =ϵ
(stackToArray(s ′))|s′|
x s = x : :s ′ toWordMem(m) :=λx . m[x · 32] | |1m[x · 32 + 1] · · · | | 1m[x · 32 + 31]
Figure 5: Configuration abstraction function. Herev || nw denotes the value obtained by concatenatingv’s andw’s byte representation,
assuming that w is represented by n bytes.
LADDMpc := { MStatepc((size, s), m, stor, cℓ) ∧ size > 1 ∧ ˆx = s[size − 1] ∧ ˆy = s[size − 2]
=⇒ MStatepc+1((size − 1, s[size − 2 → ˆx b+ ˆy]), m, stor, cℓ), (A1)
MStatepc((size, s), m, stor, cℓ) =⇒ Exc(cℓ) } (A2)
LMLOADMpc := { MStatepc((size, s), m, stor, cℓ) ∧ size > 1 ∧ ˆo = s[size − 1] ∧ ˆv = ( ˆo ∈ N) ? getWord(m, ˆo) : ⊤
=⇒ MStatepc+1((size, s[size − 1 → ˆv]), m, stor, cℓ), . . . } (M1)
LCALLMpc := { MStatepc((size, s), m, stor, cℓ) ∧ size > 6 =⇒ MStatepc+1((size − 6, s[size − 7 → ⊤]),λx . ⊤,λx . ⊤, cℓ), (C1)
MStatepc((size, s), m, stor, cℓ) ∧ size > 6 =⇒ MState0((0,λx . 0),λx . 0, stor, 1), (C2)
MStatepc((size, s), m, stor, cℓ) ∧ size > 6 ∧ Halt(storh, 1) =⇒ MState0((0,λx . 0),λx . 0, storh, 1), . . .} (C3)
Figure 6: Partial definition of L· Mpc: selection of abstract semantics rules. For MLOAD and CALL the exception rule is omitted.
word from the memory starting at this index. In our abstraction
defined by the abstract semantic rule depicted in Figure 6 either
immediately ⊤ is pushed to the stack (in case that the offset ˆo
is not a concrete value and hence the value to be loaded cannot
be determined) or the word from the concrete memory offset is
extracted. The extraction needs to account for the word-indexed
memory abstraction that we chose and is formally defined by the
function getWord(· , ·) depicted in Figure 7. In case that the offset is
a word address (divisible by 32), the corresponding value can be
accessed from the word memory m by converting the byte address
to the word address ( p
32 ). Otherwise, the word at the next lower
word address (
 p
32

) and the word at the next higher byte address
(
 p
32

) are accessed to combine their relevant parts to a full word.
Contract Calls. The abstraction for CALL is the most interesting.
This instruction takes seven arguments from the stack that specify
parameters to the call such as the target of the call or the value
to be transferred along with the memory addresses specifying the
location of the input and the return data. When returning from
a successful contract call, the value 1 is written to the stack and
the return value is written to the specified memory fragment. The
persistent storage after a successful call contains all changes that
were performed during the execution of the called contract. In the
case that the contract call terminated exceptionally instead, the
storage is rolled back to the point of calling and the value 0 is
written to the stack to indicate failure.
Since a contract CALL initiates the execution of another (un-
known) contract, all its effects on the executions of c∗ need to be
modeled. More precisely, these effects are two-fold: the resuming
execution of c∗ on the current call level needs to be approximated,
as well as the reentering executions ofc∗ (on a higher call level). For
obtaining an analysis that is precise enough to detect real-world
contracts with reentrancy protection as secure, it is crucial to model
c∗’s persistent storage as accurately as possible in reentering execu-
tions. This makes it necessary to carefully study how the storage at
the point of reentering relates to the one in the previous executions
of c∗, taking into account that (in the absence of DELEGATECALL
and CALLCODE instructions in c∗) only c∗ can manipulate its own
storage. Figure 8 overviews the storage propagation in the case
of a contract call: To this end it shows the sequence diagram of a
concrete execution of c∗ that calls a contract c ′ which again trig-
gers several reentrancies of c∗. In this course three ways of storage
propagation between executions of c∗ are exhibited: 1) The storage
is forward propagated from a calling execution to a reentering exe-
cution of c∗ ( A, C) 2) The storage iscross propagated from a finished
reentering execution to another reentering execution of c∗ ( B) 3)
The storage is back propagated from a finished reentering execution
to a calling execution of c∗ ( D, E) These three kinds of propagation
are reflected in the three abstract rules for the call instruction given
in Figure 6 and correspondingly visualized in Figure 8.
Rule (C1) describes how the execution ofc∗ (original and reenter-
ing alike) resumes after returning from the call, and hence approxi-
mates storage back propagation: For the sake of simplicity, storage
gets over-approximated in this case byλx . ⊤. The same applies to
the local memory and stack top value since those are affected by
the result of the computation of the unknown contract. Rule (C2)
captures the initiation of a reentering execution (at call level1) with
7

Accepted for ACM CCS, 2020 Clara Schneidewind, Ilya Grishchenko, Markus Scherer, and Matteo Maffei
getWord(m, p) :=
(
m[ p
32 ] p mod 32 = 0
(m[
 p
32

][p mod 32, 31]) | |p (m[
 p
32

][0, (p mod 32)−1]) otherwise
Figure 7: Function extracting the word at byte offset p from word-indexed memory m. Herev[l,r ] denotes the value represented by
v’slth byte till rth byte in big endian byte representation.v || nw is defined as in Figure 5. We assume both operations to be lifted to ˆD.
⊤ ⊤
RET
RET
CALL
RET
CALL
RET
Reentering Executions
Call Level 0 Call Level 1
RET
RET
CALL
CALL
CALL
CALL
Initial Execution
RET
Time
A
B
C
D
E
E D
C
A
B
C2 C2
C1C1 C3
 ∗
 ∗
 ∗
 ∗
 ′
Figure 8: Illustration of the different call abstractions.
storage forward propagation: As contract execution always starts
at program counter 0 with empty stack and zeroed-out local mem-
ory, only abstractions (instances of the MState0 predicate) of this
shape are implied. The forward propagation of storage is modeled
by initializing the MState0 predicate with the storage stor at call
time. Rule (C3) models storage cross propagation: Similar to rule
(C2), an abstract reentering execution in a fresh machine state is
triggered. However, the storage is not propagated from the point of
calling, but from another finished reentering execution whose re-
sults are abstracted by the halting predicateHalt at call level 1. This
rule is independent of the callee in that it is only conditioned on
the reachability of some CALL instruction, but it does not depend
on any of the callee’s state. Instead its cyclic structure requires to
extrapolate an invariant on the potential storage modifications that
are computable by c∗: Intuitively, when reentering c∗ it needs to
be considered that priorly the storage was modified by applying
an arbitrary sequence of c∗’s public functions. The significance
of this abstraction is motivated by the example in Figure 2 where
the attack is only enabled by calling Bank’srelease function first, to
release the lock before reentering.
3.3 Scope of the analysis
Before presenting the soundness result, we discuss the scope of
the analysis. The analysis targets contracts in a stand-alone setting,
which means that the behavior of all contracts that c∗ might in-
teract with is over-approximated. This abstraction is not merely a
design choice, but rather a necessity as the state of the blockchain
(including the code of the contracts residing there) at execution
time cannot be statically determined. Still, we could easily accom-
modate the precise analysis of a set of known contracts e.g., library
contracts that are already present on the blockchain. We omitted
this straightforward extension in this work for the sake of clarity
and succinctness in the analysis definition and the soundness claim.
Following this line of argumentation, we assumec∗ not to contain
DELEGATECALL and CALLCODE instructions: these instructions
enable the execution of another contract code in the context of c∗,
allowing for the modification of the persistent storage of c∗ and
even of money transfers on behalf of c∗. Using DELEGATECALL
or CALLCODE to call an unknown contract can therefore poten-
tially result in the reachability of any execution states of contract
c∗. Consequently every property relying on the non-reachability
of certain problematic contract states would be considered vio-
lated. In a setting of multiple known contracts the restriction on
DELEGATECALL and CALLCODE instructions could be relaxed to
allow for such calls that are guaranteed to target known contracts.
We now briefly illustrate the key design choices behind our ab-
straction, which we carefully crafted to find the sweet spot between
accuracy and practicality. The analysis is value sensitive in that
concrete stack, memory, and storage values are tracked until they
get abstracted due to influence of unknown components. For lo-
cal computations, the analysis is partly flow-sensitive (considering
the order of instructions, but merging abstract configurations at
the same program counters) and path-sensitive (being sensitive to
branch conditions). On the level of contract calls, a partial context
sensitivity is given in that the storage at the time of calling influ-
ences the analysis of the subsequent call, but no other inputs to
the call are tracked. In particular (due to the lack of knowledge on
interactions with other contracts) all reentering calls are merged
into a single abstraction, accumulating all possible storage states
at the point of reentering. For this reason, the analysis of calls on
level 1 is less precise than the one of the original execution on call
level 0, where only the restrictions of flow sensitivity apply.
3.4 Soundness Result
We prove, for each contract c∗, that the defined Horn-clause based
abstraction soundly over-approximates the small-step semantics
presented in § 2.2. Formally, this property is stated as follows:
Theorem 3.1 (Soundness). Let c∗ be a contract whose code does
not contain DELEGATECALL or CALLCODE. Let Γ be a transaction
environment and let S and S ′ be annotated callstacks such that |S ′| >
0. Then for all execution states s that are strongly consistent with c∗
it holds that
Γ ⊨ sc ∗ : :S →∗ S ′ + +S =⇒ ∀∆I .αc ∗ ([sc ∗ ]) ≤ ∆I
=⇒ ∃∆. ∆I ,δ(c ∗) ⊢ ∆ ∧ αc ∗ (S ′) ≤ ∆
8

eThor: Practical and Provably Sound Static Analysis
of Ethereum Smart Contracts Accepted for ACM CCS, 2020
The theorem states that every execution of contract c∗ (modeled
by a multi-step execution starting in state sc ∗ on an arbitrary call
stack S and ending in call stack S ′ + +S, indicating that the original
execution of c∗ yielded the state as modeled by the call stack S ′),
can be mimicked by an abstract execution. This means that from
every abstract configuration ∆I that abstracts sc ∗ (so that it is more
abstract than α([sc ∗ ])) one can logically derive using the Horn
clauses inδ(c∗) some abstract configuration ∆ abstracting S ′. As a
consequence of this theorem we can soundly reason about arbitrary
executions of a contract c∗: if we can show that from an abstract
configuration ∆I , that abstracts a set of initial execution states
of c∗, it is impossible to derive using δ(c∗) some other abstract
configuration ∆, that abstracts a set of problematic execution states
of c∗, then this ensures that all these problematic states are not
reachable with a small-step execution from any of the initial states.
For the proof of Theorem 3.1 we refer the reader to § B.
3.5 Reachability Properties for Contract Safety
As characterized by the soundness result, our abstraction allows
for the sound analysis of reachability properties. We will illustrate
in the following how such a reachability analysis is sufficient to
express relevant smart contract security properties.
Single-entrancy. Some generic security properties of Ethereum
smart contracts can be over-approximated by reachability proper-
ties and hence checked automatically by our static analysis. Con-
sider, the single-entrancy property from § 2.3 which has been
proven to be approximated by the following reachability property
in [24].
Definition 3.2 (Call unreachability [ 24]). A contract c is call un-
reachable if for all regular execution states(µ,ι,σ,η) that are strongly
consistent with c and satisfyµ= (д, 0,λx . 0, 0,ϵ) for someд∈ N, it
holds that for all transaction environments Γ and all callstacks S
¬ ∃s, S . Γ ⊨ (µ,ι,σ,η)c : :S →∗ sc : :S ′ + +S
∧ | S ′ | > 0 ∧ code (c) [s .µ.pc] ∈ Instcall
Where the set Instcall of call instructions is defined as
Instcall = {CALL, CALLCODE, DELEGATECALL, CREATE}
Intuitively, call reachability is a valid over-approximation of
single-entrancy as an internal transaction can only be initiated by
the execution of a call instruction. Consequently, for excluding
that an internal transaction was initiated after reentering, it is
sufficient to ensure that no call instruction is reachable at this point.
In addition, as all contracts start their executions in a fresh machine
state (program counter and active words set to 0, empty stack,
memory initialized to 0) when being initially called, it is sufficient
to check all executions of contract c that started in such a state.
Static assertion checking. The Solidity language supports the
insertion of assertions into source code. Assertions shall function
as pure sanity checks for developers and are enforced at runtime
by the compiler creating the corresponding checks on the bytecode
level and throwing an exception (using the INVALID opcode) in
case of an assertion violation [21]. However, adding these additional
checks creates a two-fold cost overhead: At create time a longer
bytecode needs to be deployed (the longer the bytecode the higher
the gas cost for creation) and at call time the additional checks need
to be executed which results in additional gas consumption. With
our static analysis technique, assertions can be statically checked
by querying for the reachability of the INVALID instructions. If no
such instruction is reachable, by the soundness of the analysis, the
code is proven to give the same guarantees as with the assertion
checks (up to gas) and those checks can safely be removed from the
code resulting in shorter and cheaper contracts.4 Formally, we can
characterize this property as the following reachability property:
Definition 3.3 (Static assertion checking). Let c be a contract and
(µ,ι,σ,η) regular execution states such that (µ,ι,σ,η) is strongly
consistent with c andµ= (д, 0,λx . 0, 0,ϵ) for someд∈ N. Let Γ be
an arbitrary transaction environment andS be an arbitrary callstack.
Then a the static assertion check for c is defined as follows:
¬ ∃s, S . Γ ⊨ (µ,ι,σ,η)c : :S →∗ sc : :S ′ + +S ∧ code (c) [s .µ.pc] = INVALID
Intuitively this property says that during an execution of contract
c it should never be possible to execute an INVALID instruction.
Semi-automated verification of contract-specific properties.
As demonstrated by Hildebrandt et al. [29], reachability analysis
can be effectively used for Hoare-Logic-style reasoning. This holds
in particular for the analysis tool presented in this work: Let us
consider a Hoare Logic triple {P }C{Q } where P is the precondition
(operating on the execution state), C is the contract code and Q is
the postcondition that should be satisfied after executing code C in
an execution state satisfying P. Then we can intuitively check this
claim by checking that a state satisfying ¬ Q can never be reached
when starting execution in a state satisfying P. More formally, we
can define Hoare triples as reachability properties as follows:
Definition 3.4 (Hoare triples). Let c∗ be a contract and let C be a
code fragment of c∗. Let P ∈ S → B be a predicate on execution
states (strongly consistent with c∗) that models execution right
at the start of C and similarly let Q ∈ S → B be a predicate on
execution states (strongly consistent withc∗) that models execution
right at the point after executing C. Then Hoare triples {P }C{Q }
can be characterized as follows:
{P }C{Q } := ∀s . P (s) =⇒ ¬ ∃s ′. Γ ⊨ sc ∗ : :S →∗ s ′c ∗ : :S ∧ ¬ Q (s ′)
Hoare-Logic style reasoning can be used for the semi-automated
verification of smart contracts given that their behavior is speci-
fied in terms of pre- and postconditions. For now it still requires
a non-negligible amount of expertise to insert the corresponding
abstract conditions on the bytecode-level, but by a proper integra-
tion into the Solidity compiler the generation of the initialization
and reachability queries could be fully automated (cf. § C.1). We
want to stress that in contrast to existing approaches, our analysis
technique has the potential to provide fully automated pre- and
postcondition checking even in the presence of loops as it leverages
the fixed point engines of state-of-the-art SMT solvers [32].
4 HORST : A STATIC ANALYSIS LANGUAGE
To facilitate the principled and robust development of static an-
alyzers based on Horn clause resolution, we designed HoRSt – a
framework consisting of a high-level specification language for
defining Horn-clause based abstractions and a compiler generating
optimized smt-lib encodings for SMT-solvers. The objective of
4The Solidity Docs [ 21] discuss exactly this future use of static analysis tools for
assertion checking.
9

Accepted for ACM CCS, 2020 Clara Schneidewind, Ilya Grishchenko, Markus Scherer, and Matteo Maffei
 SpecHoRSt
Smart Contract
Internal Horn Clause
Representation
Horn Clause
Transformations
smt-lib 
Output
Contract
Parser  CompilerHoRSt</>
Parameter
Interface
𝑝(𝑥)∧𝑞(𝑦)⇒𝑟(𝑥,𝑦)
Figure 9: Utilization of HoRSt for static analysis
HoRSt is to assist analysis designers in developing fast and robust
static analyzers from clean and readable logical specifications.
Many existing practical analyzers are built on top of modern
SMT-solvers such as z3. These solvers are highly optimized for
performance, which causes big performance deviations on differ-
ent problem instances and makes their internal workings (due to
the heavy use of heuristics) opaque to the user. Handcrafting logi-
cal specifications for such solvers in their low-level input format
smt-lib is hence not only cumbersome, error-prone, and requires
technical expertise, but is also very inflexible, since the performance
effects of different encodings may vary with the concrete problem
instance. For tackling this issue, HoRSt decouples the high-level
analysis design from the compilation to the input format: A high-
level specification format allows for clear, human-readable analysis
definitions while the translation process is handled by a stable and
streamlined backend. On top, it allows for easily applying and ex-
perimenting with different Horn-clause level optimizations that we
can show to enhance the performance of z3 substantially in our
problem domain. We will shortly illustrate the utilization of HoRSt
in the design process of our static analyzer and discuss the most
interesting optimizations performed by the HoRSt compiler. For an
introduction to the HoRSt language, we refer the reader to § A.1.
Designing static analyses using HoRSt. The HoRSt language al-
lows for writing math-like specifications of Horn clauses such as
those given in Figure 6. For parametrizing those clauses (e.g., by
the program counters of a specific contract) an interface with a
Java™ back-end can be specified that handles the domain specific
infrastructure, such as contract parsing. We overview the different
steps of the analysis design process in Figure 9.
The core of the analysis is the HoRSt specification. Using high-
level programming constructs such as algebraic data types, pat-
tern matching, and bounded iteration, a HoRSt specification de-
scribes Constrained Horn clauses over user-defined predicates.
Horn clauses can be parametrized by (families) of sets that are
specified in the parameter interface (e.g., the sets of all program
counters containing a certain bytecode instruction in a specific
contract). Given such a specification, the analysis designer needs
to provide infrastructure code written in Java™. In particular this
code needs to exhibit an implementation of those sets (or functions)
specified in the parameter interface. In the case of our analysis, the
environment code contains the infrastructure for contract parsing
and the parameter interface allows for accessing the assembled
contract information (code length, positions of opcodes, etc.) in
the