# VerX: Safety Verification of Smart Contracts
DOI: 10.1109/sp40000.2020.00024
Source: https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/ielx7/9144328/9152199/09152791.pdf (pdf)
[TRUNCATED to 60000 chars]
======================================================================

VerX: Safety Veriﬁcation of Smart Contracts
Anton Permenev 1,2 Dimitar Dimitrov 2 Petar Tsankov 1,2 Dana Drachsler-Cohen 2 Martin Vechev2
1ChainSecurity AG, Switzerland 2ETH Zurich, Switzerland
{ﬁrstname}@chainsecurity.com {ﬁrstname.lastname}@inf.ethz.ch
https://verx.ch
Abstract—We present V ERX, the ﬁrst automated veriﬁer able
to prove functional properties of Ethereum smart contracts.
VERX addresses an important problem as all real-world con-
tracts must satisfy custom functional speciﬁcations.
VERX is based on a careful combination of three techniques,
enabling it to automatically verify temporal properties of inﬁnite-
state smart contracts: (i) reduction of temporal property veriﬁ-
cation to reachability checking, (ii) a new symbolic execution
engine for the Ethereum Virtual Machine that is precise and
efﬁcient for a practical fragment of Ethereum contracts, and
(iii) delayed predicate abstraction which uses symbolic execution
during transactions and abstraction at transaction boundaries.
Our extensive experimental evaluation on 83 temporal prop-
erties and 12 real-world projects, including popular crowdsales
and libraries, demonstrates that V ERX is practically effective.
Keywords-smart contracts, temporal speciﬁcation, automated
veriﬁcation
I. I NTRODUCTION
Ensuring correctness of smart contracts, programs that run
on top of blockchains, is a pressing security concern. Today,
billions worth of USD are controlled by smart contracts, and
only in the past couple of years, millions of these have been
lost by exploiting subtle ﬂaws in the logic of these programs.
The issue is exacerbated as the code becomes immutable
once placed on the blockchain and hence bugs found after
deployment cannot be ﬁxed.
Current audit practice. To mitigate this problem, current
audit practices of smart contracts involve checking whether the
code is safe against two kinds of vulnerabilities: (i) generic
security errors such as reentrancy and overﬂows, typically
achieved by running automated security tools (e.g., Secu-
rify [65], Slither [4], and Mythril [50]), and (ii) deeper, custom
functional requirements, often done by manual, best-effort
code inspection. An example of such a requirement is: “The
sum of deposits never exceeds the contract’s balance. ”. While
substantial advances in creating security tools that discover
generic errors were made over the last few years, there has
been little progress in automating the veriﬁcation of deeper,
more challenging functional properties. This is particularly
problematic because manually checking the satisfaction of
such deeper requirements often involves non-trivial reasoning,
increasing the chance that critical bugs slip in production.
Goal: Formal guarantees for smart contracts. We believe
that smart contracts, similarly to any safety-critical system
(e.g., controllers deployed in cars and airplanes), must be
Contract
always(claimRefund()==>
! once(sum(deposits)>= 10000))
Formalized requirement (§V)
Investors can claim refunds only if the sum
of deposits never exceeded 10, 000 ether
Instrumented
contract
Abstraction predicates:
e == Escrow
sum(deposits)>= 10000
Symbolic execution + Delayed predicate abstraction (§VI-VII)
VERX
Veriﬁed Counter-example
add predicates
Fig. 1: Usage and veriﬁcation ﬂow of V ERX. A requirement
is formalized as a temporal safety property. Then, the contract
is instrumented with the property and relevant predicates for
veriﬁcation are automatically extracted. These are fed into
VERX, which either veriﬁes the property, outputs a counter-
example, or indicates that additional predicates are needed.
formally veriﬁed before deployment. While this observation is
not new, only a handful of smart contract projects (e.g., Mak-
erDAO [7]) have been formally veriﬁed so far. Current veri-
ﬁcation efforts are conducted using heavyweight interactive-
theorem provers, such as Isabelle/HOL [9] and Coq [68].
These require non-trivial manual effort and expertise, making
the audit process expensive and time-consuming, resulting in
limited adoption by the developer and audit communities.
Key challenges. To address this problem and enable devel-
opers and auditors to formally certify smart contracts without
requiring deep expertise in formal veriﬁcation, one would ide-
ally create a veriﬁer capable of automatically proving custom,
functional properties. However, building such an automated
veriﬁer is challenging for at least two reasons.
First, smart contracts often interact with external contracts
via function calls. In turn, these external contracts may call
back the smart contracts we want to verify in arbitrary ways
(since their code is unknown). Automated veriﬁcation in the
presence of such arbitrary and unboundedly many callbacks
from external contracts is challenging.
1661
2020 IEEE Symposium on Security and Privacy
© 2020, Petar Tsankov. Under license to IEEE.
DOI 10.1109/SP40000.2020.00024

Second, smart contracts process an unbounded number
of transactions. Therefore, even though smart contracts are
usually loop-free, the veriﬁer needs to soundly handle loops
because the contracts’ functions are executed in an implicit
inﬁnite loop, processing a single transaction in each iteration.
VERX: Automated veriﬁer for Ethereum contracts. In
this work, we introduce V ERX, an automated veriﬁer of
functional requirements for Ethereum smart contracts, which
aims to address the above challenges. The design decisions
underpinning V ERX were strongly motivated by the practical
challenges that arise when auditing real-world smart contracts.
One of our key observations is that most real-world con-
tracts defend against external callbacks by ensuring that these
do not introduce new behaviors, i.e., any behavior with ex-
ternal callbacks is equivalent to another behavior without
external callbacks; we call these effectively external callback
free (EECF) contracts, adapting the earlier notion of effectively
callback free contracts [38]. VERX focuses on verifying EECF
contracts as they enjoy two important beneﬁts. First, they
simplify the formalization of requirements, as auditors can
write the speciﬁcation without explicitly considering all possi-
ble external callbacks. Second, the veriﬁer can soundly avoid
exploring all possible external callbacks, which facilitates
precise and scalable analysis.
In Fig. 1 we depict the high-level steps performed by VERX.
As a ﬁrst step, we formalize the requirements as temporal
safety properties in the speciﬁcation language of V ERX. We
identify temporal properties as a particularly good ﬁt for
capturing contract requirements (also observed by [59]), be-
cause contracts process sequences of transactions and temporal
properties can specify which sequences of contract states are
considered valid. To ease adoption, we use the syntax of
Solidity [6] (the most widely used language for Ethereum
contracts) and extend it with temporal operators (e.g., always
and once) so to enable quantifying over contracts’ states.
Fig. 1 shows the formalization of an example requirement for
crowdsale contracts. In our evaluation, we illustrate further
examples and present common idioms (e.g., access control,
state transitions, and multi-contract invariants) of real-world
contracts that have been veriﬁed using V ERX.
Once the property is formalized, VERX reduces the problem
of temporal safety veriﬁcation to that of reachability checking
by instrumenting the provided contract with the formalized
property. By working with the instrumented instead of the
original contract, we can directly leverage state-of-the-art pro-
gram analysis methods, which typically focus on reachability
veriﬁcation. Such a reduction approach to veriﬁcation has been
shown effective in other settings (e.g., [26], [28]).
Given the instrumented contract, V ERX carries out the ver-
iﬁcation by employing a particular combination of abstraction
and symbolic execution, one that is especially effective in
the setting of smart contracts. We refer to this combination
as delayed predicate abstraction. Concretely, to deal with the
unbounded number of transactions processed by the contract,
VERX abstracts contract states which arise in-between trans-
actions via a set of abstraction predicates while leveraging
symbolic execution for precise analysis within transactions. As
we demonstrate with examples later, delaying abstraction until
the end of transactions is essential as key invariants often break
in the middle of transactions. Moreover, precise reasoning of
individual transactions using symbolic execution is possible
because contract functions usually have bounded loops and
recursion (so to avoid inﬁnite computations on the blockchain).
VERX automatically infers the abstraction predicates from
(i) the contract’s code, such as immutable variables and point-
ers to contracts (e.g., e == Escrow ), and (ii) from the prop-
erty by extracting atomic predicates (e.g, sum(deposits)>=
10000); see Fig. 1. This means that users typically do not need
to provide any predicates to V ERX and can use it in a push-
button manner. For example, as we show in our evaluation,
77 out of 83 properties can be automatically veriﬁed using
the predicates inferred by V ERX, leaving only six properties
where the user had to provide additional predicates (shown
by the backward arrow). Further, because existing symbolic
engines for Ethereum are either unsound or inefﬁcient (or
both), we introduce a new engine that precisely models non-
standard features of Ethereum’s Virtual Machine (such as
hash-based object allocations and gas mechanics) yet scales
well for a practical fragment of Solidity.
To demonstrate the effectiveness of V ERX, we present
an extensive evaluation over 12 real-world projects with 83
relevant temporal properties. Our results show that V ERX
scales to verifying real-world contracts.
Main Contributions. Our contributions are:
• A delayed predicate abstraction approach which com-
bines symbolic execution performed during transaction
execution with abstraction done in-between transactions.
Delayed abstraction is key to enabling automatic veriﬁ-
cation of temporal safety properties of smart contracts.
• The ﬁrst end-to-end veriﬁcation system, called V ERX,
which can automatically verify functional speciﬁcations
of real-world contracts. V ERX incorporates delayed ab-
straction, a new symbolic execution engine which avoids
the pitfalls of existing tools, as well as sound handling
of key Ethereum features.
• An extensive experimental evaluation over 12 real-world
projects (138 contracts) and 83 safety properties, showing
that V ERX can verify interesting temporal properties of
real-world smart contracts, including popular crowdsales
and libraries.
II. M OTIVATING EXAMPLE AND
VERIFICATION CHALLENGES
We now present a decentralized crowdsale scenario together
with relevant requirements and their formalization. We then
discuss key challenges when verifying such properties. In the
next section we present the veriﬁcation ﬂow of V ERX and
how it addresses these issues.
1662

R0 Claiming a refund by an investor decreases the escrow’s
balance by the investor’s deposit.
R1 The escrow’s balance must be at least the sum of investor
deposits, unless the crowdsale is declared successful.
R2 The escrow never allows the beneﬁciary to withdraw the
investments and the investors to claim refunds.
R3 Investors cannot claim refunds after more than 10, 000
ether is collected.
(a) Requirements
1 contract Crowdsale {
2 Escrow escrow;
3 uint256 closeTime;
4 uint256 raised = 0;
5 uint256 goal = 10000 * 10**18;
6
7 function constructor () {
8 escrow = new Escrow(0x1234);
9 closeTime = now + 30 days;
10 }
11
12 function invest() payable {
13 require(raised < goal);
14 // fix: uncomment pre-condition below:
15 // require(now<=closeTime);
16 escrow.deposit.value(msg.value)(msg.sender);
17 raised += msg.value;
18 }
19
20 function close() {
21 require(now > closeTime || raised >= goal);
22 if (raised >= goal) {
23 escrow.close();
24 } else {
25 escrow.refund();
26 }
27 }
28 }
(b) Crowdsale smart contract
ϕR0 ≡ 2(claimRefund(address p) → Escrow.balance =
Escrow.balance• − Escrow.deposits•[p])
ϕR1 ≡ 2(state ̸= SUCCESS
→ sum(deposits) ≤ Escrow.balance)
ϕR2 ≡ 2(¬(♦withdraw() ∧♦claimRefund()))
ϕR3 ≡ 2(claimRefund() → ¬♦(sum(deposits) ≥ goal))
(c) Formalized requirements as temporal safety properties
1 contract Escrow {
2 address owner, beneficiary;
3 mapping(address => uint256) deposits;
4 enum State {OPEN, SUCCESS, REFUND}
5 State state = OPEN;
6 constructor(address b) {
7 owner = msg.sender;
8 beneficiary = b;
9 }
10 modifier onlyOwner {
11 require(msg.sender == owner);
12 }
13 function close() onlyOwner {state = SUCCESS;}
14 function refund() onlyOwner {state = REFUND;}
15 function deposit(address p) onlyOwner payable {
16 deposits[p] = deposits[p] + msg.value;
17 }
18 function withdraw() {
19 require(state == SUCCESS);
20 beneficiary.transfer(this.balance);
21 }
22 function claimRefund(address p) {
23 require(state == REFUND);
24 uint256 amount = deposits[p];
25 deposits[p] = 0;
26 p.call.value(amount)();
27 }
28 }
(d) Escrow smart contract
Fig. 2: Crowdsale example: (a) requirements and (c) their formalization, (b) crowdsale contract and (d) escrow contract.
A. Crowdsale Example
We present a crowdsale use case, one of the most common
scenarios implemented on Ethereum. The goal here is to
collect 10, 000 ether within 30 days after deployment. It
is considered successful if 10, 000 ether has been collected
within 30 days, in which case the beneﬁciary can withdraw
the funds. Otherwise, the crowdsale is considered failed and
users are allowed to claim a refund. We summarize four key
requirements in Fig. 2a showing how users (investors and the
beneﬁciary) can transfer funds. The crowdsale implementation
is given in Fig. 2, taken from the widely-used OpenZeppelin
library [3], which uses an escrow contract to lock the funds
invested during the crowdsale. The contracts’ initial state is
deﬁned by their constructors (the escrow is created by the
crowdsale’s constructor, at Line 8). In the crowdsale contract,
raised tracks the amount of collected funds, goal is set to
10, 000 ether ( 1 ether = 1018 wei), and closeTime is set to
now (time of deployment) plus 30 days. The escrow tracks the
funds invested by individual users in the mapping deposits.
B. Challenge 1: Speciﬁcations in the Presence of Callbacks
As a ﬁrst step, we formalize the requirements of the
crowdsale and escrow contracts (referred to as a bundle of
contracts). This is, however, nontrivial because the bundle does
not execute in isolation, but may also interact with external,
potentially malicious contracts.
Interactions with external contracts. We illustrate a possi-
ble interaction between the escrow and external contracts in
Fig. 3. To refund an investor p, the escrow executes Line 26,
which calls a designated fallback function in p. Here, p is
any account that invested in the crowdsale, and the invoked
fallback function can thus have arbitrary behavior. In Fig. 3,
we consider a scenario where p calls back claimRefund,
this time passing address q as an argument. The second call
claimRefund(q) is nested in claimRefund(p). Importantly, the
nested call modiﬁes the escrow’s state (changes escrow’s bal-
ance) before execution control is returned to claimRefund(p).
This means the state at the end of claimRefund(p) depends
on callbacks initiated by external contracts.
1663

Escrow.claimRefund(p)
p.fallback()
Escrow.claimRefund(q)
q.fallback()
Execution time
Fig. 3: Interaction between the escrow and external contracts
p and q. Rectangles indicate the active function, dashed
lines indicate functions waiting for external calls to return,
downward and upward arrows indicate call and return points.
Speciﬁcation challenge. Requirements typically implicitly
assume that the bundle executes without callbacks. For
example, requirement R0 stipulates that at the end of
claimRefund(p), the escrow’s balance is decreased by p’s
deposit. This requirement does not hold if we interpret it
directly over executions with callbacks. As illustrated in
Fig. 3, there could be multiple calls to the escrow before
claimRefund(p) terminates, which may increase the escrow’s
balance (via calls to deposit(p)) as well as decrease it
(via calls to claimRefund(p)). One approach to address this
discrepancy is to directly account for all possible callbacks in
the formal requirement. Unfortunately, this is complicated and
error-prone because external contracts can behave arbitrarily:
one would need to accommodate inﬁnitely many additional
behaviors. Conceptually, this challenge is analogous to speci-
fying concurrent objects [38], [58].
Effectively external callback free contracts. To address the
speciﬁcation challenge, we mirror a well-established approach
to specifying concurrent objects [41]. The idea is to let user
requirements implicitly assume no callbacks from external
contracts. We then lift those requirements to all possible
behaviors in a generic way. We do that by imposing an
extra condition that we call effective external callback freedom
(EECF), which generalizes [38] to our setting. This extra
condition stipulates that any behavior with external callbacks
is equivalent to a behavior without. Any two equivalent
behaviors are guaranteed to execute the same functions and
terminate in an identical state. For example, the behavior in
Fig. 3 is equivalent to executing claimRefund(p) and then
claimRefund(q) sequentially (without external callbacks).
The EECF condition is satisﬁed by most real-world con-
tracts. In practice, contracts defer calls to external contracts
to the end of transactions, as a generic defense against unex-
pected state changes due to malicious callbacks in the middle
of transactions. Indeed, this best practice provides a sufﬁcient
condition to establish EECF. A contract that did not satisfy
EECF is the infamous DAO contract [1], which has a function
similar to claimRefund with the exception that lines 25 and 26
are switched, meaning that p’s deposit is set to zero only after
the call is made. Indeed, this enables an adversary to drain the
escrow’s balance (by reclaiming her deposit multiple times).
Property / System Mythril Oyente Manticore VERX
Inductive, holds: ϕR1 FP FP TN TN
Violation:ϕR2 FN TP FN TP
Fig. 4: Running existing symbolic analyzers for verifying ϕR1
and ﬁnding the violation of ϕR2.
Formalizing requirements. We present the formalization of
the requirements for our example in Fig. 2c. The properties
are interpreted over a sequence of blockchain states that
appear in-between transactions, i.e., states that users observe
before and after transactions. We deliberately do not deﬁne
the requirements’ semantics over states that appear within
transactions, as such states capture low-level implementation
details and transient computations which are not observable
by end-users. As mentioned, the EECF condition lifts the
requirements to behaviors with callbacks: for any behavior,
we impose the given requirements on the equivalent behaviors
where the contract’s functions are invoked without callbacks.
Property ϕR0 formalizes that for any state (captured with
the always temporal quantiﬁer, denoted by 2) reached af-
ter a successful execution of claimRefund(address p) , the
escrow’s balance (returned by Escrow.balance) equals the
previous escrow’s balance (denoted Escrow.balance•) minus
the deposit of investor p in the previous state. The property
refers to the p’s deposit in the previous state, as it is set to
zero after executing claimRefund.
Property ϕR1 formalizes that if the escrow is not in state
SUCCESS (indicating a successful crowdsale), then the sum of
deposits (returned by sum(deposits)) is less than or equal to
the escrow’s balance (returned by Escrow.balance).
Properties ϕR2 and ϕR3 use the once quantiﬁer (denoted
by♦) to refer to past states, where ♦ϕ holds if ϕ holds at any
past state of the contract. For example, ϕR2 formalizes that at
no point in time the functions withdraw() and claimRefund()
have both been successfully executed by the contract. Property
ϕR3 uses the idiom 2(ϕ → ¬♦ψ) to formalize that once ψ
holds at a given state, then ϕ must never hold in the future of
the contract.
C. Challenge 2: Unbounded Veriﬁcation
Next, we discuss the challenges in verifying the properties
of our example.
Precise symbolic execution for Ethereum. We start with
ϕR1, a global invariant of the form 2ϕ with no nested tempo-
ral quantiﬁers. This property is inductive: it holds in the initial
blockchain state, and it is also preserved after processing any
transaction sent to the contracts at any blockchain state where
ϕR1 holds. To establish this, one can encode all behaviors
of the functions using symbolic execution, which is possible
due to the limited use of loops/recursion in most contracts,
as we discuss in Section VII. However, modeling Ethereum’s
Virtual Machine (EVM) both precisely and efﬁciently has
proved challenging. In fact, in Fig. 4, we show that 2 out of the
3 state-of-the-art symbolic execution engines for Ethereum fail
1664

C ={f1,..,f n}
ϕ
instrument
C with ϕ
inductive check
via SE
{ϕ′} { ϕ′}
f1 ··· fn
{ϕ′} { ϕ′}
veriﬁed
compute ﬁxed point
via delayed PA
extract predicates from C and ϕ
iteratively compute:
reach(Cϕ′ ) =α1∨..∨αt
check property
on ﬁxpoint
reach(Cϕ′ )⇒ϕ′
veriﬁed
counter-example
Cϕ′, 2ϕ′ Cϕ′, 2ϕ′
reach(Cϕ′ )
holds holdsadd predicates
Fig. 5: Flow of V ERX: given a contract C and property ϕ, V ERX instruments C with ϕ and attempts an inductive check using
symbolic execution. If this fails, it performs delayed abstraction using predicates extracted from C and ϕ.
to establish our invariant (i.e., to verify property ϕR1); we note
that Manticore [2] is precise, but inefﬁcient for some examples,
as we show in our evaluation (Section IX). We address this
challenge by designing a new symbolic execution engine for
EVM (Section VIII-A) that is both precise and efﬁcient for a
practical fragment of Solidity (Section VII).
Discovering deeper violations. The following sequence of
transactions violates property ϕR2:
1) call to close() at state now > closeTime and raised <
goal, which changes the escrow’s state to REFUND;
2) call to claimRefund(p) with any address p;
3) call to invest() with ether value msg.value ≥ goal;
4) call to close(), now at state now > closeTime and
raised ≥ goal, which changes the escrow’s state to
SUCCESS;
5) call to withdraw().
This violation is due to a missing pre-condition in function
invest() (Line 15 in Fig. 2b) which would prevent calls after
the crowdsale has ended. This shows that counter-examples
in stateful contracts can be deep, going beyond the reach of
existing symbolic execution tools (with their default depth
limit of 2). In fact, in Fig. 4, we see that both Mythril and
Manticore (which unroll multiple transactions) fail to discover
the violation with a 5 hours timeout limit and a depth limit
set to 5. Oyente discovers the bug due to imprecise modeling
of EVM and not due to supporting precise exploration up
to depth 5 (as shown in the false positive for ϕR1). V ERX
correctly fails to verify this property and outputs exactly the
sequence of transactions listed above as a possible violation.
As we show in our evaluation, once the missing pre-condition
is added, V ERX successfully veriﬁes ϕR2.
Inferring invariants using abstraction. Property ϕR3 is
non-inductive. To verify it, V ERX needs to infer an in-
variant that holds over all reachable contract states. In this
example, the invariant is constructed out of the following
atomic predicates: now > closeTime, raised < goal, and
sum(deposits) ≤ raised, where the ﬁrst two predicates
come from function pre-conditions. V ERX extracts these and
other predicates from the code and the property. To com-
pute the needed invariant, V ERX uses delayed abstraction
(explained shortly) where the abstraction step is applied only
at transaction boundaries. This delay is needed to verify ϕR3
because the predicate sum(deposits) ≤ raised is violated
between Line 16 and Line 17 in the crowdsale contract. That
is, standard predicate abstraction would fail to verify ϕR3 with
these predicates, while delayed predicate abstraction succeeds.
Delayed predicate abstraction is explained in Section VI.
III. V ERIFICATION FLOW OF VERX
We now describe the veriﬁcation ﬂow of V ERX (illustrated
in Fig. 5) and discuss how it addresses key technical chal-
lenges. The input to V ERX consists of one or more contracts
(we call these a bundle of contracts) together with a (temporal)
safety property ϕ. For illustration purposes, we assume we are
given one contract C with functions {f1, . . . , fn}.
Veriﬁcation by reduction. First, to verify a temporal prop-
erty of interest ϕ, V ERX processes C and ϕ so to pro-
duce an instrumented contract Cϕ′ and a new property 2ϕ′,
where 2 is the always quantiﬁer and ϕ′ is an assertion
over the global blockchain state. For example, it converts
ϕR3 ≡ 2(claimRefund() → ¬♦(sum(deposits) ≥ goal))
into 2(claimRefund() → ¬ pψ), where pψ tracks whether
sum(deposits) ≥ goal has been satisﬁed in the current or the
past states of the contract. This approach of reducing temporal
property veriﬁcation to a reachability check was successfully
used in prior work (e.g., [26], [28]). A key beneﬁt is that it
enables VERX to leverage existing analysis techniques, such as
symbolic execution and predicate abstraction (described next)
to verify that2ϕ′ holds on the instrumented contract Cϕ′ (and
as a result that ϕ holds on the original contract C).
Veriﬁcation of inductive properties without abstraction.
As stated, the contract’s functions are run in an inﬁnite loop:
1 while true
2 (user, func, args) := // arbitrary
3 run func(args) as user
Each iteration corresponds to the execution of a single transac-
tion, constructed by any user who decides to run an arbitrary
contract function with arbitrary arguments. Since this loop is
inﬁnite and the number of transactions that users may initiate
is unknown in advance, we cannot directly apply symbolic
execution (SE) to verify that ϕ′ holds on the instrumented
contract (as SE requires loops to be bounded). That is why
1665

we ﬁrst attempt to verify ϕ′ inductively: assuming ϕ′ holds
before fi is invoked (pre-condition) with symbolic arguments
and a symbolic user, we check whether ϕ′ holds after fi has
completed (post-condition). If the inductive check holds for
every function fi and if ϕ′ holds on the initial state then
we conclude that 2ϕ′ holds on Cϕ′. If the above check
fails, however, ϕ′ may still hold for Cϕ′. Conceptually, this
means we need to strengthen ϕ′ while ensuring that it over-
approximates the reachable states of Cϕ′.
Veriﬁcation with delayed predicate abstraction. To over-
approximate the reachable states of Cϕ′, V ERX uses a com-
bination of predicate abstraction and symbolic execution to
perform delayed predicate abstraction. The idea is to analyze
each transaction fully with symbolic execution and abstract
only the states where ϕ′ is meant to hold, namely, those
appearing at transaction boundaries. The abstraction is done
using the predicates automatically extracted from the contract
C and the original property ϕ.
We iterate this procedure in a classic ﬁxed point iteration
loop. First, we initialize the set reach(Cϕ′) of abstract states
reachable at transaction boundaries with the abstraction of the
concrete initial state. Then, we simply follow the outer while
loop and non-deterministically select a function fi to invoke;
we execute fi symbolically (assuming symbolic arguments and
a symbolic user) and compute the precise symbolic state s at
the end of the transaction. Technically, s is a disjunction of
constraints p1∨· · ·∨pk, each pi capturing a possible path of the
function’s k paths. After computing s, V ERX abstracts each
pi ∈ s into an abstract state αi. This results in a set of new
abstract states α1, . . . , αm which are added to reach(Cϕ′).
Note that m ≤ k, as the symbolic states of two paths may
become abstracted to the same abstract state.
Despite the inﬁnite outer loop, VERX is guaranteed to reach
a ﬁxed point since the predicate abstraction domain is ﬁnite
(due to the ﬁnite number of abstract predicates). The over-
approximation of the reachable states of Cϕ′ is given by the
disjunction α1 ∨ · · · ∨αt of all abstract states in the ﬁxed point
reach(Cϕ′). To verify the property, V ERX checks whether
the ﬁxed point logically implies the desired property ϕ′. If
yes, we conclude that 2ϕ′ holds on Cϕ′. Otherwise, V ERX
attempts to construct a counter-example. In doing so, it either
succeeds and outputs the counter-example or fails and asks
the user to provide additional predicates. We note that one
could implement standard abstraction reﬁnement techniques
to automate predicate discovery [25].
IV. S YSTEM MODEL
In this section we provide background on the Ethereum
blockchain and formalize its behavior. We then formalize the
notion of bundle behaviors V ERX reasons about.
A. Ethereum Overview
The Ethereum blockchain is a distributed storage that
supports two types of accounts: user accounts and contract
accounts. User accounts are the entry-points through which
⟨Execution⟩ ::=⟨External txn⟩∗
⟨External txn⟩ ::=⟨Internal txn⟩
⟨Internal txn⟩ ::=⟨Message⟩[⟨Command⟩∗]
⟨Message⟩ ::= (Recipient, Sender, Value, Data, Gas)
⟨Command⟩ ::= Load| Store| Local|⟨ Internal txn⟩
Fig. 6: An execution is a sequence of external transactions
each nesting one or more internal transactions. Each internal
transaction starts with a message and proceeds in a sequence
of commands. Commands may load or store data from and to
the private storage, perform local computations (not affecting
the storage), and initiate nested internal transactions.
Behavior≜ MState∗ MState≜ BState× Frame∗
BState≜ Address→ Program× Storage× Value
Frame≜ Message× Program× Memory× Gas
Program≜ Code Recipient ≜ Address Data ≜ Word∗
Storage≜ ByteWord Sender ≜ Address Gas ≜ Word
Memory≜ ByteWord Value ≜ Word Address ≜ Word
Fig. 7: An EVM behavior is a sequence of machine states,
represented as pairs holding a blockchain state and a stack of
frames, one per nested internal transaction.
users interact with the system by submitting transactions. Con-
tract accounts (or simply contracts) are autonomous objects
that process transactions. Every contract is associated with a
program that executes incoming transactions, and a private
storage for persisting data across transactions.
An execution of the Ethereum blockchain is a sequence of
external transactions, as deﬁned in Fig. 6. Each transaction
is initiated with a message that deﬁnes the addresses of the
recipient and sender accounts, a value of ether (possibly zero)
to be transferred from the sender to the recipient account,
(possibly empty) data, and a gas value. If the recipient is
a user account then the data is empty and the transaction
results in transferring the ether value from the sender to the
recipient. Otherwise, the recipient is a contract, and the data
identiﬁes a function of the contract’s program together with
arguments passed to the function. Upon the reception of such
a message, the contract’s program is executed by the Ethereum
Virtual Machine (EVM) [66], modifying the contract’s storage
accordingly. The execution of each command, such as a
storage write, is associated with a gas fee and the execution
aborts if the accumulated gas fees exceed the gas value.
A contract’s program can create messages to start transac-
tions on other contracts, which in turn can do the same. These
transactions behave like a standard procedure call, meaning
the caller waits for the callee to complete. The calls have
transactional semantics and are termed internal transactions .
Since procedure calls nest, this leads to a nested transactional
model: aborting the current internal transaction undoes its
1666

effects on the storage, including the effects of all nested (child)
internal transactions. The top-level transaction initiated by the
user together with all nested transactions form an external
transaction. Finally, an execution of the Ethereum blockchain
is a sequence of such external transactions.
To illustrate this model, consider that account User calls
function close() of the Crowdsale contract in Fig. 2, which
in turn calls function close() of the Escrow contract. The
corresponding external transaction is given by
(Crowdsale, User, 0, close(), 200000)[
· · ·
(Escrow, Crowdsale, 0, close(), 129275)[ · · ·]
· · ·
]
Here, we omit all non-calls (indicated by · · ·). This transaction
consists of two messages. The amount of ether in both
messages is set to 0, indicating that no ether is transferred
when processing the transaction. The value 200 000 in the ﬁrst
message is the amount of gas provided by User for processing
the transaction. The gas in the second message ( 129 275) is
lower as reaching the call to the escrow costs 70 725 gas.
B. Ethereum Behaviors
A behavior of the EVM is the sequence of machine states
the EVM goes through during execution. The EVM state of the
EVM is formalized in [66], of which we provide a schematic
description in Fig. 7. A machine state is a pair holding the
blockchain state, and a stack of frames, one per active nested
internal transaction.
• The blockchain state collects all account data and is a
mapping from account addresses to account states. The
ﬁgure shows only contract accounts, whose state consists
of the contract’s program, storage, and balance (values).
• A frame contains: (1) the message used to activate the
call, (2) the next program fragment to be executed (i.e., a
program counter), (3) the call’s local scratchpad memory,
(4) the remaining gas available for execution.
The EVM operates on 32-byte words. All numeric values (e.g.
addresses) are represented as unsigned integer words. Contract
storage and frame memory are word-addressed.
C. Bundle Behaviors
The requirements of a bundle C of contracts constrain its
EVM behaviors. Given an EVM behavior, we obtain the
behavior of the bundle by extracting the sequence of pairs
(T, b) where T is a transaction whose recipient is in the
bundle C and b is a blockchain state that captures the effects
of T . As discussed in Section II-B, we follow the well-
established approach in the ﬁeld of concurrency and extract
behaviors of C only from EVM behaviors without external
callbacks (i.e., without concurrency). Thus, our speciﬁcations
do not directly constrain all possible EVM behaviors but only
those where transactions run isolated from external callbacks.
The remaining EVM behaviors are controlled by imposing a
generic correctness criterion [38] on the bundle C.
Deﬁnition 1. A C-entry transaction in an EVM behavior
is a transaction executed by a contract in C whose parent
transaction, if present, is executed by a contract not in C.
For example, in the EVM behavior in Fig. 3 the transactions
Escrow.claimRefund(p) and Escrow.claimRefund(q) are C-
entry transactions: the ﬁrst one is an external transaction
that executes contract Escrow and does not have a parent
transaction; the second one executes contract Escrow and its
parent transaction is executed by a contract p ̸∈ C outside the
bundle C = {Escrow, Crowdsale}.
We call an EVM execution C-external callback-free if it
contains no C-entry transaction nested in another C-entry
transaction. For example, the behavior shown in Fig. 3 is not
C-external callback-free because Escrow.claimRefund(q) is
nested inside Escrow.claimRefund(p).
Let msg(T ) be the message that initiated T , and let post(T )
stand for the blockchain state at the point when T ﬁnishes.
Deﬁnition 2. The bundle behavior of C corresponding to a
C-external callback-free EVM execution is the sequence that
records the pair (
msg(T ), post(T )
)
for every C-entry transaction T in the EVM execution.
That is, for every transaction T , the behavior records the
transaction message and the blockchain state at the end of T
but restricted only to contracts in the bundle C.
Effective external callback freedom. The criterion that we
impose on bundles requires that all EVM behaviors are in a
certain sense equivalent to C-external callback-free executions.
We adapt the effective callback freedom criterion of Grossman
et al. [38] to our setting where the internal callbacks within
a C-entry transaction are thought of as executing sequen-
tially. Both, our criteria and [38], are variants of conﬂict-
serializability [52]. For brevity, we do not state the actual
criterion but a necessary and sufﬁcient condition. As standard,
we formalize the condition by ﬁrst constructing a directed
graph (digraph) that captures dependencies between operations
and then requiring that the resulting digraph is acyclic.
Deﬁnition 3. The C-serialization digraph of an EVM execution
has a vertex for every C-entry transaction and an edge (S, T)
for all operations s of S and t of T (S ̸= T ) such that:
1) s precedes t in the EVM execution, and
2) at least one of s and t modiﬁes part of the blockchain
state that is read or modiﬁed by the other.
Intuitively, each edge (S, T) indicates that the blockchain
state after T depends on S being executed earlier. C-entry
transactions not involved in circular dependencies are not
logically interrupted by callbacks outside the bundle.
Deﬁnition 4. A bundle C is effectively external callback free
if all EVM executions have acyclic C-serialization digraphs.
1667

V. P ROPERTY SPECIFICATION LANGUAGE
We express properties of bundle behaviors using past linear
temporal logic, or Past LTL for short. We provide a brief
introduction below, for further details please refer to [48].
Linear temporal logic. A formula in Past LTL is inductively
deﬁned as either an atomic formula A, or a logical or temporal
connective applied to one or more formulas ϕ, ψ:
ϕ, ψ ::= A | ϕ ∨ ψ | ¬ ϕ |  ϕ | ϕ S ψ
A formula can be interpreted at any position in a bundle
behavior. Atomic formulas directly refer to the message or
blockchain at the current position. For example, the formula
withdraw() holds when the current transaction was a call to
the withdraw() function. The formula from Fig. 2
sum(deposits) ≤ Escrow.balance
holds when in the current state the sum of values of the
deposits mapping is less than or equal to the balance of the
Escrow contract. Boolean connectives are interpreted in the
standard way. For the temporal connectives
• previously ϕ evaluates ϕ in the previous state if such
exists and returns false otherwise;
• since ϕ S ψ looks for a nonfuture moment when ψ holds
so that ϕ holds in all moments after, up to the present.
The since connective can deﬁne other useful connectives
like once♦ (is/was true) and still■ (is/has always been true):
♦ψ≜ ⊤ S ψ ■ψ≜ ¬♦¬ψ
Given a Past LTL formula ϕ, the 2ϕ formula uses the
always connective 2 and states that ϕ must hold at all
positions of the bundle behavior.
Conversion to non-temporal formulas. Past LTL formulas
are sufﬁciently expressive to capture any safety property, yet
they are equivalent to assertions, i.e., non-temporal formulas.
This allows us to convert them to assertions and reuse standard
safety veriﬁcation techniques.
To convert a Past LTL formula ϕ to a non-temporal one, we
encode the semantics of past connectives into the behaviors of
the contract. That is, we introduce auxiliary variables that track
the truth values of temporal subformulas in ϕ, a well-known
method [54].
We demonstrate this method with an example. Consider the
temporal formula ϕR3 =2ϕ from Fig. 2:
ϕ ≡ claimRefund() → ¬♦(sum(deposits) ≥ goal).
First, we select a subformula whose top-level connective is
temporal. Only one such subformula is present in our example:
ψ ≡♦(sum(deposits) ≥ goal).
Then, we introduce a fresh variable pψ that tracks ψ’s truth
value, and update it according to the semantic rule of ♦:
p′
ψ ≡ (sum(deposits) ≥ goal) ∨ pψ.
Finally, we rewrite ϕ to the non-temporal formula:
ϕ ≡ claimRefund() → ¬pψ.
Property syntax. To allow auditors and developers to specify
properties, we extend Solidity’s syntax with temporal quanti-
ﬁers. For example, we denote the operators
• always2 by always,
• once♦ by once, and
• previously by prev.
For convenience, we also provide aggregate functions over
mappings, denoted by sum(deposits). The properties can
further refer to the latest transaction’s data, including its
signature and arguments. We use Solidity’s syntax for logical
connectives and expressions (e.g., users write && for ∧) and in-
troduce implication (==>) which is often used in properties.
VI. D ELAYED ABSTRACTION FOR VERIFICATION
To verify a Past LTL speciﬁcation of a bundle of contractsC
we apply abstract interpretation over a symbolic domain.
We employ predicate abstraction [35] but without the usual
conversion to boolean programs. Our approach is similar to
that of Flanagan and Qadeer [32] where two transformers are
alternated: precise symbolic transformers to handle individual
commands, and an imprecise transformer to ensure conver-
gence. In contrast, classic abstraction applies an imprecise
transformer at every step. Hence, we call the precise/imprecise
approach delayed abstraction.
VERX receives a bundle C of contracts (written in Solidity)
and a Past LTL speciﬁcation 2ϕ that should hold for all
behaviors of the bundle. First, it converts the Past LTL
speciﬁcation to an assertion (Section V). Thus, at this point,
we assume that ϕ is an assertion. Then, V ERX compiles all
contracts in C to EVM bytecode [66], and then it performs
abstract interpretation on the bytecode. We compile to EVM
because it is much simpler than Solidity.
To keep the discussion concise, we assume the bundle C is
described by the blockchain address of its contracts together
with two programs:
1) initC—a deterministic program that produces the initial
blockchain state in every behavior of the bundle;
2) stepC—a program that non-deterministically executes a
transaction of C starting in a given bundle state.
Given the property ϕ and the compiled code of C, V ERX
tries to verify the following program:
initC; assert ϕ; while true { stepC; assert ϕ }
Ignoring the assertions, this program produces all possible
behaviors of the given bundle of contracts C.
This veriﬁcation problem amounts to proving that ϕ holds
for all message-state pairs (m, s) appearing in behaviors
of C. Recall that the behaviors of a bundle were deﬁned
in Section IV. This set of pairs is called the concrete semantics
of C, which we denote with Sem(C). Thus, our goal is to
verify:
Sem(C) |= ϕ. (1)
1668

A. Abstract Interpretation
As the concrete semantics can be infeasible to compute,
establishing (1) directly is not possible except for restricted
cases. Abstract interpretation [27] addresses this issue by
soundly approximating the concrete semantics with an abstract
semantics Sem#(C) for which the veriﬁcation problem is
easier:
Sem#(C) |= ϕ. (2)
Sound approximation means that the set γ(Sem#(C)) of all
message-state pairs encoded by the abstract semantics extends
the concrete semantics:
Sem(C) ⊆ γ(Sem#(C)).
Then, because of soundness, proving (2) implies that (1) holds.
To compute the abstract semantics by abstract interpretation,
one mimics how the concrete semantics is computed as an
element of the powerset lattice C = P(S), where S is the set
of all possible message-state pairs, including those that do not
appear in the behaviors of the bundle C. We reinterpret the two
programs that describe the bundle as concrete transformers:
initC ∈ C stepC : C → C.
The concrete semantics Sem(C) is simply the least ﬁxed point
of the monotone map
S ↦→ initC ∪ stepC(S).
To compute Sem#(C) by abstract interpretation, we ﬁrst
replace the concrete domain C with an abstract domain A,
where the two are connected by the concretization function
γ : A → C.
We then deﬁneabstract transformers instead of concrete ones:
init#
C ∈ A step#
C : A → A.
To mimic the concrete computation, we equip the abstract
domain A with a lattice structure, that is, a join operation ⊔.
This allows us to deﬁne the abstract semantics Sem#(C) as a
ﬁxed point of the map
A ↦→ init#
C ⊔ step#
C (A).
As a result, we obtain a sound approximation provided the
abstract transformers are sound. That is, for all A ∈ A:
initC ⊆ γ(init#
C ) stepC(γ(A)) ⊆ γ(step#
C (A)).
Fig. 8 summarizes the abstract interpretation approach. To
model non-determinism more precisely, we use a powerset
domain A, that is, the elements A ∈ A are sets of elements of
another domain. The concretization function then is:
γ(A) =
⋃
a∈A
γ(a).
1: Input
2: C A bundle of contracts.
3: ϕ A non-temporal formula.
4: procedure VERIFY (C, ϕ)
5: A ← FIXPOINT (A ↦→ init#
C ⊔ step#
C (A))
6: for all a ∈ A do
7: if a ̸|= ϕ then
8: report a and exit.
9: end if
10: end for
11: report ϕ holds.
12: end procedure
Fig. 8: Veriﬁcation via a powerset domain.
B. Delayed Abstraction
We now discuss the particular abstraction used in V ERX.
We apply what we call a delayed abstraction, an elegant idea
which ﬁrst appeared in [32]. Delayed abstraction addresses
imprecision in reasoning about invariants that are broken at
intermediate points of the program. For smart contracts this
typically occurs when a transaction temporarily breaks its
invariant inside and then restores it at the end of its execution.
To deal with imprecision, delayed abstraction simply delays
the abstraction step until the end of the transaction, but
employs a precise symbolic domain Φ to reason within the
transaction. Because ﬁxed point computation in the precise
domain might not converge, at the end of the transaction, a
switch is made to a less precise predicate abstraction domain
A = P(PA) where PA ⊆ Φ. Thus, the abstract transformer
ﬁrst makes a precise symbolic execution step, and then a
predicate abstraction step:
A SE(f)− − − − − − − → P(Φ) α− − − − − − − →A.
To perform symbolic execution, the symbolic domain Φ
consists of ﬁrst order formulas with message-state pairs (m, s)
for models. That is, for every ψ ∈ Φ
γ(ψ) = {(m, s) : (m, s) |= ψ}.
The only restriction to the formulas in Φ is that an SMT
solver should be able to handle them. The SE(f) step starts
with a set of formulas A ∈ A and for each formula ψ ∈ A,
it symbolically executes all feasible program paths in f ∈
{initC, stepC}. The result of processing ψ is a set of formulas
{ψ′
1, . . . , ψ′
n} (one per feasible program path) that give the
strongest postcondition of f with respect to ψ:
γ(
n⋁
i=1
ψ′
i) = f(γ(ψ)).
The result of processing all formulas in A, as described
above, is an intermediate set S ∈ P (Φ) of formulas.
For delayed abstraction, we use a set PA of cubes [35]
which are conjunctions of literals over a ﬁxed set of basic
predicates P = {P1, . . . , Pn} ⊆ Φ. The abstraction step
α : Φ → PA
1669

projects each formula ψ′ ∈ S onto PA:
α(ψ′) =
⋀
{L ∈ Λ : ψ′ |= L},
where Λ is the set of all literals over the set P . The result of
processing the set S results in a set of cubes that is an element
in the domain A.
An important part of predicate abstraction is choosing the
set P of basic predicates. If one does not ﬁnd the right set P ,
the computed abstract element will be sound, but might be too
imprecise to prove the desired speciﬁcation ϕ. Typically, one
seeds P with all atomic subformulas of the speciﬁcation. If
veriﬁcation fails with this set, we increase P automatically by
extracting predicates that appear in the program. We deﬁne
the types of predicates we extract from the program and
give examples where they bring sufﬁcient precision to prove
realistic properties in Section IX-C. If veriﬁcation still fails,
we ask the user to provide additional predicates (in principle,
one could extend the system to perform standard abstraction
reﬁnement so to automatically discover predicates).
VII. P RACTICAL SOLIDITY FRAGMENT
The effectiveness of delayed abstraction relies on a precise
symbolic execution engine that scales to realistic contracts.
Building such an engine for arbitrary Solidity contracts is,
however, challenging due to the Turing-completeness of the
language. In this section, we deﬁne a practical fragment of
Solidity that covers a wide range of real-world contracts yet
enables precise and scalable symbolic execution. We summa-
rize the restrictions in Fig. 9 and explain them in detail below.
A. Loops and Recursion
Symbolic execution fails to terminate when a program
contains unbounded loops or recursion. In Ethereum, however,
long transaction executions are costly (since they consume
more gas) and moreover cannot exceed the block’s gas limit,
which imposes a hard bound on the gas budget of transactions.
Because of this, unbounded loops and recursion are considered
anti-patterns.
In our fragment, we consider Solidity contracts without
recursion and where loops are bounded. Such contracts have
ﬁnitely many paths which can be fully analyzed symbolically.
To further extend our fragment, we also support the following
common loop pattern in Solidity:
1 function pm(Arg[] args) {
2 for (i = 0; i < args. length; i++) {
3 f(args[i]);
4 }
5 }
We call this loop pattern packed-calls, as the loop is merely
used to group multiple independent calls to the function f
in a single transaction. For the purpose of veriﬁcation, such
loops can be eliminated without changing the semantics of the
bundle. That is, any transaction invoked with multiple elements
in args can be split into multiple transactions to pm:
pm([a1, . . . , an]) ≃ pm([a1]) . . . pm([an]). (3)
VERX automatically detects and soundly bounds such loops.
Type Restriction
Loops Loops are bounded or match the packed-calls pattern
Recursion No recursion allowed
External calls Must satisfy effective external callback freedom
Gas exceptions Gas exceptions propagate to the external transaction
Storage access No direct access to storage via assembly
Restricted No execution of external code
behaviors No creation or destruction of contracts
Fig. 9: Solidity fragment supported by V ERX
B. Calls to External Contracts
The Ethereum blockchain permits a bundle contract c1 to
call an external contract d, and then contract d to call back
some bundle contract c2:
c1 ∈ C → d ̸∈ C → c2 ∈ C . (4)
The external contract d can potentially make an unbounded
number of callbacks to the bundle (until all gas is depleted),
making it infeasible to fully analyze with symbolic execution.
To address this challenge, we consider only contracts that
satisfy the effective external callback freedom condition de-
ﬁned in Section IV-C. This condition implies that any behavior
of the contracts with external callbacks is equivalent to a
behavior without external callbacks. We deﬁned the check used
to determine whether a smart contract satisﬁes this condition
in Section VIII.
C. Gas Exception Propagation
If an internal transaction consumes all gas allocated to it,
then it terminates with an “out of gas” exception, undoing all
changes to the shared storage. After that, execution resumes
in the parent transaction. Since the amount of gas can be
arbitrary, the above behavior implies that most calls are a
potential branching point where the call can be omitted. These
branching points explode the number of program paths to be
symbolically executed.
We avoid this explosion by requiring contracts to propagate
all exceptions up the call stack, effectively reverting the current
bundle transaction. This means that the transaction will not
appear in the blockchain execution and can be ignored.
D. Storage Access
As mentioned in Section VI, we do not analyze Solidity
directly but the EVM bytecode obtained by compiling Solidity
code. The challenge with EVM bytecode is that it is low-
level and important information is lost during compilation.
The major challenge comes when reasoning about compound
objects such as structures, arrays, and maps. The EVM lacks
primitives for such objects, and consequently, all arrays and
maps are spliced together into a single ﬂat array of 2256 words.
Therefore, to reason about compound objects, we need to
reason about the speciﬁc hash-based allocation scheme used
by the Solidity compiler.
1670

To illustrate the scheme, consider an array a that holds
objects of size n. The array gets a unique identiﬁer id(a),
and its elements are distributed according to 1:
a[i] ↦→ SHA-3(id(a)) + n ∗ i.
That is, the array is allocated at the address that equals the
SHA-3 hash of its identiﬁer and spans the subsequent words.
The allocation scheme must be valid in the sense that
distinct objects are allocated disjoint storage. This validity
rests on two conditions, which are required to model in order
to analyze array and map accesses precisely:
1) There are no SHA-3 collisions to guarantee that distinct
objects and map elements start at distinct addresses.
2) SHA-3 hashes are sufﬁciently spread apart so that dis-
tinct objects do not overlap.
These two conditions are assumed to hold for any Solidity
contract. They can, however, be violated if a contract directly
accesses storage using inlined assembly. To this end, we
restrict the use of inlined assembly in bundle contracts.
E. Unsupported Instructions
Finally, in our fragment we ignore contracts that:
1) Execute external code in the context of the bundle
contracts (instructions CALLCODE or DELEGATECALL).
2) Destroy bundle contracts or create new ones (instruc-
tions CREATE and SUICIDE).
Execution of external code is known to entail a security risk.
For example, attackers can execute arbitrary code if they
gain control over the destination address of a DELEGATECALL
instruction. Due to these security risks, these instructions are
considered a bad practice and are excluded from new bytecode
proposals that aim to improve the security of the EVM [44].
Creation and destruction of contracts can be supported but is
less common and we omit these behaviors for simplicity.
VIII. T HE VERX SYSTEM
We now present details on our V ERX system: the new
symbolic execution engine, the types of predicates extracted
from contracts, and optimizations used to scale veriﬁcation.
A. Symbolic Execution Engine
VERX uses a new symbolic execution engine for EVM,
which avoids the pitfalls of existing engines, as detailed in
our evaluation (Section IX-D). Our symbolic execution engine
extends standard techniques [19], [45] with the following
unique features of Solidity: (i) object allocation in Solidity (de-
termined by hash functions), (ii) contract calls, and (iii) sound
approximation of gas mechanics. We also model sums of
arrays and mappings, which although not part of Solidity are
needed for verifying relevant properties.
Symbolic state. We perform symbolic execution with
Z3 [31]. Machine words in the symbolic state are encoded
1For simplicity, we assume that n = 256. The storage address is computed
using a more complex formula if n ̸= 256; cf. [8].
precisely as 256-bit vectors. EVM storage and memory are
encoded in the theory of arrays. Calls to external contracts are
modeled with uninterpreted constants.
Checking effective external callback freedom (EECF). We
check that all contracts in the bundle satisfy EECF through a
proxy pattern. The pattern forbids:
1) Writing to the bundle’s blockchain state after calls to
external contracts. Example writes include transferring
ether or writing values to storage variables;
2) Reading the bundle’s blockchain state after calls to ex-
ternal contracts with ≥ 5000 gas. Example reads include
accessing a contract’s balance or storage variables.
The latter condition allows reads for calls to external contracts
with < 5000 gas since such calls guarantee that the callee
cannot, due to the limited gas budget, modify the bundle’s
blockchain state. We note that such calls are common because
Solidty’s statements send and transfer are frequently used
by developers to transfer ether to other contracts and these
provide 2300 gas to the callee.
Checking exception propagation. Standard function invo-
cations in Solidity automatically propagate exceptions. Only
low-level calls such as send and call do not propagate
them. To check that the caller propagates exceptions, we
perform dataﬂow analysis to verify that the contract always
reverts the state when such a call fails.
Modeling object allocation. As mentioned, a unique aspect
of Solidity/EVM is the hash-based allocation scheme used to
determine the location of an object in the storage by applying
the SHA-3 hash function. The challenge here is that SHA-3
is a rather complex function and if we model it precisely with
SMT constraints, we would cripple the symbolic execution.
To this end, we interpretSHA-3 as a different, much simpler
function, that still ensures the two assumptions mentioned
above, namely no hash collisions and sufﬁciently spread-
out hashes. This approach is sound provided that the smart
contracts we verify always access memory through Solidity’s
primitives, that is, they never access raw memory directly. We
ensure this memory access by forbidding the use of inline
assembly in the Solidity source.
We encode the simpler function with the function symbols
SHA-3n : {0, 1}n → {0, 1}256,
one per input size n to a SHA-3 invocation in the bytecode.
We encode the expected behavior of the function with extra
SMT constraints. Importantly, the constraints do not specify
the function completely. That is, we assume little about the
function, and the V ERX veriﬁcation results hold for any
function that satisﬁes those weak assumptions.
(i) The ﬁrst set of constraints ensures that no collisions
occur. No collisions in principle means that the union of all the
functions SHA-3n is one-to-one. This is, of course, impossible
since the domain of the function is larger than its codomain.
That is why we do not ensure injectivity on its whole domain.
Instead, we consider each symbolic execution separately and
1671

ensure injectivity only on the (possibly symbolic) arguments
that appear in the execution. To do that, let Xn be the
arguments applied to SHA-3n. We add the constraints:
1) No collisions within each Xn:
⋀
x∈Xn
SHA-3−1
n (SHA-3n(x)) = x. (5)
Here, SHA-3−1
n is a function symbol that represents a
pseudo-inverse function of SHA-3n.
2) No collisions between each Xm and Xn, for sufﬁciently
many pairs m ̸= n of distinct input sizes:
⋀
x∈Xn
Ln ≤ SHA-3n(x) ≤ Rn. (6)
The numbers Li ≤ Ri divide the address space into
disjoint intervals [Lm, Rm] ∩ [Ln, Rn] = ∅.
In our experiments, we set concrete bounds Li, Ri that are far
apart from each other, giving intervals of length 2100.
We used the above constraints instead of the prosaic
x ̸= y =⇒ SHA-3m(x) ̸= SHA-3n(y).
because they are linearly many in the size of the union ∪iXi
instead of quadratic. In our experience, this reduced the load
on the SMT solver signiﬁcantly.
(ii) The second set of constraints ensures that hashes are
spread apart. For every set Xn we add the constraints
⋀
x∈Xn
SHA-3n(x) ≡ 0 (mod S), (7)
where S is sufﬁciently large (64 in our experiments).
Calls. When the engine reaches a call, it checks whether the
address being called is concrete or symbolic. If it is concrete,
the execution continues by transferring the given (possibly
symbolic) value of ether and then checks whether the address
is in the bundle. If so, this is a contract account, and we model
the call precisely, activating the contract’s program in a new
frame. If the concrete account is external, then we treat it as
a user account, meaning no further action beyond a transfer is
taken (as mentioned, this treatment is sound when the bundle
contracts satisfy effective external callback freedom).
In the case where the address being called is symbolic, the
execution ﬁrst non-deterministically selects the address of a
bundle contract or treats the symbolic address as an external
user account. After that, the execution proceeds as before.
Gas mechanics. The engine implements gas mechanics to
terminate symbolic execution along infeasible paths, where
an out-of-gas exception is guaranteed. Concretely, the engine
tr